THE SIGNAL INVERSION EFFECTčHow Authentic Cognition Mimics Deception Across Domains: A Cross-Disciplinary Research ProposalResearch Design & Statistical Analysis PlanDraft č March 2026CONFIDENTIAL č FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ONLY
Executive SummaryThis proposal outlines a cross-disciplinary study designed to demonstrate what we term the Signal Inversion Effect: the systematic pattern whereby authentic cognitive and linguistic behaviours are misidentified as indicators of deception, while performed or rehearsed behaviours are mistakenly interpreted as signals of honesty.The core thesis is deliberately counterintuitive: the people who sound most guilty are most likely to be telling the truth, and the people who sound most credible are most likely to be lying. This is not a marginal effect. It operates across criminal justice, education, medicine, employment, and interpersonal relationships, and it is supported by converging evidence from multiple independent research traditions.By reanalysing existing large-scale datasets using SPSS, we aim to demonstrate statistically significant negative correlations between authentic truth markers and perceived credibility markers across multiple domains simultaneously, producing evidence that is, in the words of our research question, implausible to dismiss.The Core ParadoxAcross every domain studied, the same inversion pattern emerges:BehaviourWhat It Actually SignalsWhat Observers BelieveHedging ("I think," "maybe")Genuine memory retrieval; honest uncertaintyEvasion; hiding somethingBreaking eye contactCognitive effort; accessing memoryShifty; untrustworthyFragmented narrativeAuthentic trauma recall; real memory is messyIncoherent; fabricatingSaying "I don't know"High competence (Dunning-Kruger); genuine limits of knowledgeIncompetent; evasiveConfident, fluent deliveryRehearsed narrative; possible deceptionHonest; credibleImpersonal pronouns ("it," "that")Distancing from false narrative (false confessions)Not typically noticedReporting confusion after learningDeep engagement; desirable difficultyFailure to understandWhy This MattersIf this inversion is as systematic as the converging evidence suggests, it has profound implications. Innocent people are being convicted because they sound guilty. Competent students are being underestimated because they report confusion. Genuinely ill patients are being dismissed because their symptom descriptions sound vague. The entire folk psychology of credibility assessment may be functioning as an inverted compass.
Foundational Evidence1. Deception Detection Is Barely Above ChanceBond & DePaulo (2006) conducted the definitive meta-analysis: 206 studies, 24,483 judges. Average accuracy in detecting lies was 54%, barely above a coin flip. People correctly identified only 47% of lies as deceptive. Critically, people are more confident in their incorrect judgments than their correct ones.This alone should be disqualifying for any system that relies on human credibility assessment, yet the entire criminal justice system depends on exactly this capacity.2. What People Believe Signals Lying Is WrongThe Global Deception Research Team (2006) surveyed over 11,000 participants across 75 countries in 43 languages. The dominant finding: 64% of people worldwide believe liars avoid eye contact. This belief is essentially universal and essentially wrong. Meta-analyses of actual deception cues show gaze aversion has no reliable relationship with lying. Liars, if anything, maintain more eye contact because they know the stereotype and overcompensate.3. Actual Cues to Deception Are InvertedDePaulo et al. (2003) analysed 158 cues across 1,338 estimates from 120 studies. The findings relevant to our thesis:ź Liars tell less compelling tales with fewer ordinary imperfectionsź Truth-tellers include more spontaneous corrections, hedging, and admissions of memory gapsź The only consistently reliable cues (higher vocal pitch, larger pupil dilation) are invisible to untrained observersź The average effect size across all 158 cues was d = 0.10, which is functionally negligible4. False Confessions Are Linguistically DistinctRizzelli, Kassin & Gales (2021) compared 37 proven false confessions (Innocence Project, DNA exonerations) with 98 presumed true confessions (FBI case files) using LIWC and corpus analysis. Three linguistic predictors distinguished the two with 74ą83% accuracy:ź Impersonal pronouns ("it," "that," "this"): higher in false confessionsź Personal pronouns ("I," "me," "mine"): higher in true confessionsź Conjunctions ("but," "and," "because"): higher in true confessionsThe guilty person who actually committed the crime says "I" more. The innocent person performing a coerced confession distances themselves with "it" and "that." Yet jurors, judges, and police cannot distinguish between the two. False confessions remain persuasive even when contradicted by DNA evidence.5. Desirable Difficulty and the Confusion ParadoxBjork & Bjork (2011) established that learning conditions which feel difficult and confusing actually produce superior long-term retention. Students who report confusion after a lesson have engaged more deeply than students who report confidence. The confident students experienced a fluency illusion: the material felt easy, so they assumed they understood it.This is the same inversion in a different domain. The signal of genuine cognitive engagement (confusion, difficulty, uncertainty) is interpreted as failure, while the signal of superficial processing (confidence, fluency) is interpreted as success.
Available DatasetsThe following publicly or semi-publicly available datasets can be used for the proposed analyses:DatasetNContentsAccessDomainMichigan Real-Life Trial (PÄrez-Rosas et al., 2015)121 videos (61 deceptive, 60 truthful)Transcripts, gesture annotations, ground-truth labels via verdict/exonerationRequest from U-Michigan LIT labCriminal justiceRizzelli Confession Corpus (2021)135 confessions (37 false, 98 true)LIWC-coded linguistic features; pronoun frequencies; conjunction ratesCUNY Academic Works (open)Criminal justiceGlobal Deception Research Team (2006)11,000+ participants, 75 countriesBeliefs about deception cues; cross-cultural stereotypesPublished data tables (open)Belief systemsDePaulo et al. (2003) Meta-Analysis1,338 estimates of 158 cuesEffect sizes for each cue; moderator analysesPublished tables (open)Deception cuesBond & DePaulo (2006) Meta-Analysis206 studies, 24,483 judgesAccuracy rates; modality effects; motivation effectsPublished tables (open)Detection accuracy
MethodologyStudy Design OverviewThis study uses a convergent cross-disciplinary design, reanalysing existing datasets with consistent coding frameworks to demonstrate the Signal Inversion Effect across domains. The primary statistical tool is SPSS (version 28+).Phase 1: Linguistic Coding of Trial TranscriptsDataset: Michigan Real-Life Trial Dataset (121 transcripts)Each transcript will be coded for the following linguistic variables using LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) software:VariableOperationalisationPredicted DirectionHedging frequencyCount of uncertainty markers: "I think," "maybe," "sort of," "I'm not sure," "perhaps"Higher in truthful statementsCertainty markersCount of absolute terms: "definitely," "absolutely," "I'm certain," "clearly"Higher in deceptive statementsExperiencer framingPassive/agentless constructions: "it happened," "things got out of hand"Higher in truthful trauma accountsFirst-person pronoun rateFrequency of "I," "me," "my," "mine" per 100 wordsHigher in truthful statementsImpersonal pronoun rateFrequency of "it," "that," "this," "those" per 100 wordsHigher in deceptive statementsNarrative coherenceRated 1ą5 by blinded coders: logical flow, chronological order, completenessModerate coherence = truthful; very high or very low = deceptiveSpontaneous correctionsSelf-repairs, backtracking, "actually, no, it was..."Higher in truthful statements"I don't remember" usageFrequency and syntactic context of memory-gap admissionsDifferent patterns in true vs. false statements (Rizzelli, 2021)Phase 2: BeliefąReality Inversion MatrixDatasets: Global Deception Research Team (2006) + DePaulo et al. (2003)We construct a matrix comparing what people believe signals deception (from the GDRT survey data) against what actually correlates with deception (from the DePaulo meta-analysis). For each cue, we code:ź Belief direction: Do people think this cue increases or decreases with lying?ź Actual direction: Does this cue actually increase or decrease with lying?ź Concordance: Do belief and reality match, or are they inverted?Our prediction: a statistically significant proportion of cues will show inversion (belief direction opposite to actual direction), concentrated specifically in the hedging, uncertainty, and gaze categories.Phase 3: False Confession Linguistic ReplicationDataset: Rizzelli Confession Corpus (37 false, 98 true)We replicate and extend Rizzellišs (2021) findings by:ź Running a discriminant function analysis in SPSS using their three predictor variables (personal pronouns, impersonal pronouns, conjunctions)ź Adding our hedging and certainty marker variables to test whether they improve classification accuracyź Cross-validating with the Michigan trial transcript dataPhase 4: Cross-Domain Convergence TestThis is the critical phase. We standardise the inversion effect across all datasets into a common metric and test whether the same directional pattern holds:ź In criminal justice: hedging/fragmentation predicts innocence but perceived guiltź In education: reported confusion predicts deeper learning but perceived failureź In deception beliefs: the cues people trust most are the least diagnosticA consistent negative correlation between authentic markers and perceived credibility markers across three or more independent domains would constitute strong evidence for a domain-general Signal Inversion Effect.
SPSS Analysis PlanPrimary AnalysesAnalysis 1: Correlation Matrix (Trial Transcripts)Bivariate Pearson correlations between each linguistic variable and ground-truth veracity label (0 = deceptive, 1 = truthful). We predict significant positive correlations between truthfulness and hedging frequency, spontaneous corrections, first-person pronoun rate, and memory-gap admissions.SPSS syntax: CORRELATIONS /VARIABLES=veracity hedging certainty experiencer firstperson impersonal coherence corrections memory_gaps /PRINT=TWOTAIL NOSIG.Analysis 2: Binary Logistic Regression (Confession Data)Dependent variable: confession type (0 = true, 1 = false). Predictors: personal pronoun rate, impersonal pronoun rate, conjunction rate, hedging rate, certainty marker rate.SPSS syntax: LOGISTIC REGRESSION VARIABLES confession_type /METHOD=ENTER personal_pron impersonal_pron conjunctions hedging certainty /CLASSPLOT /CASEWISE OUTLIER(2) /PRINT=GOODFIT CI(95).Analysis 3: Sign Test for BeliefąReality InversionFor each cue studied in both the GDRT belief data and the DePaulo actual-cue data, we code whether the belief direction matches or opposes the empirical direction. A one-sample binomial test against chance (50%) determines whether inversions occur significantly more often than expected.SPSS syntax: NPAR TESTS /BINOMIAL (.50)=inversion_coded.Analysis 4: Discriminant Function Analysis (Cross-Validation)Using the Michigan trial data as a training set, we build a discriminant function from our linguistic variables and test classification accuracy against known veracity labels. We then cross-validate against the Rizzelli confession corpus.SPSS syntax: DISCRIMINANT /GROUPS=veracity(0 1) /VARIABLES=hedging certainty firstperson impersonal coherence corrections /METHOD=WILKS /PRIORS EQUAL /STATISTICS=MEAN STDDEV UNIVF BOXM COEFF RAW TABLE CROSSVALID.Secondary AnalysesEffect Size Comparison Across DomainsWe convert all inversion effects to a common metric (Cohenšs d) and test whether the magnitude of inversion is consistent across criminal justice, education, and belief domains using a heterogeneity test (Q statistic)."I Donšt Remember" Deep DiveFollowing Rizzellišs finding that variations of "I donšt remember" differed between true and false confessions, we conduct a targeted analysis of this specific phrase across both the confession corpus and the trial transcripts. Syntactic context, frequency, and position within narrative are coded and compared.
Predicted OutcomesIf the Signal Inversion Effect is real and domain-general, we predict:1. Negative correlation (r < ą0.30) between hedging frequency and perceived credibility, despite a positive correlation between hedging and actual truthfulness2. Classification accuracy of 70ą80% in distinguishing true from false statements using linguistic markers that observers cannot reliably detect3. Significant inversion rate (>65%) when comparing believed deception cues against empirically validated cues, with gaze aversion, hedging, and nervous behaviour showing the strongest inversions4. Consistent effect direction across criminal justice, education, and belief domains, with non-significant heterogeneity (Q test p > .05)5. The phrase "I donšt remember" will show qualitatively different syntactic patterns in true versus false statements, with true statements using it as a genuine memory boundary and false statements using it as a narrative placeholderImplicationsA confirmed domain-general Signal Inversion Effect would suggest that:ź Human credibility assessment systems (jury trials, police interrogation, job interviews, clinical assessment) are operating with inverted assumptionsź Training programmes that teach people to detect deception through behavioural cues may actively worsen accuracy by reinforcing inverted beliefsź Linguistic analysis tools (LIWC, corpus analysis) can outperform human judgment because they bypass the folk-psychological inversionź Innocent defendants who display authentic trauma responses (hedging, fragmentation, gaze aversion) are systematically disadvantaged in adversarial legal systemsź Educational assessment that rewards confident self-reports over honest confusion systematically underestimates the students who are learning most deeply
Historical Parallels: When Consensus Was WrongThe Signal Inversion Effect sits within a broader pattern of scientific reversals where expert consensus persisted for decades despite being fundamentally incorrect. These parallels are included not as direct evidence but as precedent for how deeply counterintuitive findings can meet institutional resistance.Peptic Ulcers and H. pyloriFor decades, the medical establishment was certain that peptic ulcers were caused by stress, spicy food, and personality type. Barry Marshall could not convince anyone that a bacterial infection was the true cause. In 1984, he drank a petri dish of H. pylori, developed gastritis, and proved his case. He and Robin Warren received the Nobel Prize in 2005. The stress-personality model had persisted because it felt intuitively correct and matched existing cultural assumptions about psychosomatic illness.Dietary Fat and Heart DiseaseIn the 1960s, the sugar industry funded research that successfully shifted public health blame from sugar to dietary fat. The resulting low-fat dietary guidelines dominated nutritional science for 40 years and likely contributed to the obesity epidemic by encouraging high-carbohydrate diets. The manipulation was not revealed until 2016 when researchers at UCSF discovered the industry documents.The Four-Minute MileBefore Roger Bannister broke the four-minute mile in 1954, it was widely believed to be a physical impossibility. Within 46 days, his record was broken again. Within three years, sixteen runners had done it. The barrier was not physical but perceptual. The consensus itself was the constraint.LobotomyAntŚnio Egas Moniz received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1949 for developing the prefrontal lobotomy. The procedure was endorsed by the psychiatric establishment and performed on tens of thousands of patients. It is now regarded as one of the most damaging episodes in the history of medicine.The common thread: in each case, the consensus position was not merely slightly wrong but directionally wrong. The treatment caused the disease. The diet caused the obesity. The perceived limit created the actual limit. The Signal Inversion Effect follows this same pattern: the cues people use to detect deception are the cues that actually signal honesty.
Key ReferencesBjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2011). Making things hard on yourself, but in a good way: Creating desirable difficulties to enhance learning. In M. A. Gernsbacher et al. (Eds.), Psychology and the real world (pp. 56ą64). Worth Publishers.Bond, C. F., Jr., & DePaulo, B. M. (2006). Accuracy of deception judgments. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 214ą234.Bond, C. F., Jr., & The Global Deception Research Team. (2006). A world of lies. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 37(1), 60ą74.DePaulo, B. M., Lindsay, J. J., Malone, B. E., Muhlenbruck, L., Charlton, K., & Cooper, H. (2003). Cues to deception. Psychological Bulletin, 129(1), 74ą118.Hartwig, M., & Bond, C. F., Jr. (2011). Why do lie-catchers fail? A lens model meta-analysis of human lie judgments. Psychological Bulletin, 137(4), 643ą659.Kassin, S. M. (2014). False confessions: Causes, consequences, and implications for reform. Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(1), 112ą121.Luke, T. J., et al. (2023). What have we learned about cues to deception? A survey of expert opinions. Psychology, Crime & Law.PÄrez-Rosas, V., Abouelenien, M., Mihalcea, R., & Burzo, M. (2015). Deception detection using real-life trial data. Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2015), 59ą66.Rizzelli, L., Kassin, S., & Gales, T. (2021). The language of criminal confessions: A corpus analysis of confessions presumed true vs. proven false. The Wrongful Conviction Law Review, 2(3), 205ą225.Sen, U. M., et al. (2022). Multimodal deception detection using real-life trial data. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 13(1), 306ą319.Sporer, S. L., & Schwandt, B. (2006). Paraverbal indicators of deception: A meta-analytic synthesis. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 421ą446.Vrij, A., Granhag, P. A., & Porter, S. B. (2010). Pitfalls and opportunities in nonverbal and verbal lie detection. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 11(3), 89ą121.