The more detailed, the
more reliable?
Evaluating the diagnosticity of linguistic cues
for credibility assessment on a mock crime
scenario in Swedish
Clara Gustafsson
Uppsala University
Department of Linguistics and Philology
Master Programme in Language Technology
Master’s Thesis in Language Technology, 30 ects credits
October 2, 2024
Supervisors:
Fredrik Wahlberg, Uppsala University
Moa Lidén, Uppsala University, University College London, EB-CRIME
Abstract
Credibility assessment is a common practice in any judicial institution and be-
comes crucial when there is a shortage of technical evidence, as verbal statements
become the main source of evidence. Judges and jurors are tasked with estimating
the credibility of the witnesses, the alleged victim, and the alleged perpetrator,
solely based on their accounts. In multiple rounds, the Swedish Supreme Court
has proposed credibility criteria (Sw. tillförlitlighetskriterier), which describe
characteristics in a statement that are allegedly indicative of truth. In the latest
edition, a statement is said to be more likely to be true if it is “clear”, “long”,
and “detailed”. These criteria are intended to aid practitioners in assessing the
veracity of a statement given in a legal process. Other frameworks that employ
language-based criteria are also discussed.
The motivation for this study is to evaluate the credibility criteria given by
the Swedish Supreme Court, with the long-term goal of extending the scientific
basis on which these criteria are used in practice. To do this, we employ tools
and methods from computational linguistics and natural language processing to
quantitatively estimate and evaluate the prevalence of a selection of linguistic
cues on a new Swedish dataset of true and false statements (n=251), fetched
through an experiment using a mock crime scenario. The dataset features both
confessions and denials and in addition, the statements are annotated as believed
or non-believed by a researcher of law.
Results from statistical analysis (significance tests, correlation analysis, and
logistic regression) suggest that some cues are informative on our data set. Past
tense verbs were indicative of truth, while positive sentiment, lexical variation,
and present tense verbs were false-indicative. However, overall, larger differences
were found between confessions and denials, and different cues were significant
within confessions and denials, respectively. This marks the importance of con-
sidering the type of statement when using criteria for credibility assessment.
Furthermore, we saw indications that a human practitioner might overestimate
length and negative sentiment as indicators of truth. Implications for research in
verbal lie detection and for the practice of credibility assessment are discussed.
Contents
Preface 5
Acknowledgements 6
1. Introduction 7
1.1. Verbal Lie Detection and Credibility Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2. Purpose and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2. Background and Theory 10
2.1. Credibility Assessment and Lying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2. Verbal Lie Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2.1. The Swedish Supreme Court’s Credibility Criteria . . . . . . . 11
2.2.2. Criteria-Based Content Analysis (CBCA) . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2.3. Reality Monitoring (RM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2.4. General Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2.5. Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3. Empirical Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3.1. Manual Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3.2. Computational Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
10
12
13
13
14
15
15
16
3. Method 19
3.1. Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1.1. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1.2. Stimuli and Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1.3. Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1.4. Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2. Linguistic Cues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.1. Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.2. Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3. Statistical Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
19
20
22
22
23
23
23
26
4. Results 28
4.1. True vs. False . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2. Confession vs. Denial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.3. True vs. False x Confession vs. Denial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
29
33
4.4. True vs. False x Believed vs. Not Believed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5. Discussion 38
5.1. Summary of Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.2. Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
40
6. Conclusion 41
6.1. Main Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.1.1. Research Questions Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.1.2. Preliminary Implications for Theory and Practice . . . . . . . 41
6.2. Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
41
42
3
6.3. Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A. Criteria Overview 48
4
Preface
This thesis has been done in collaboration with The International Centre for Evidence-
Based Criminal Law (EB-CRIME), which is a network of researchers from different
scientific disciplines that collaborate in research projects about evidence in criminal
cases. The research aims to facilitate evidence-based evaluations and decision-making
by, for example, police officers, prosecutors, forensic medical doctors and judges
EB-CRIME is funded by the Swedish Research Council.
More specifically, this thesis connects to one of the subprojects of EB-CRIME, which
is source evaluation. One of the key objectives of this subproject is to empirically
evaluate statement analysis methods that are used for credibility assessment. This
thesis aims to explore this topic in a Swedish context, on behalf of EB-CRIME.
5
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I want to thank my supervisors. Moa Lidén, for her inspiring
outlook, helpful comments, and belief in me. Fredrik Wahlberg, for his positive attitude,
and for repeating the words that feeling uncertain and wanting to redo everything is
sometimes a sign of creativity. Thank you both for giving me the opportunity to work
on this topic and to be a part of EB-CRIME.
Also, a special thank you to Johan, Peter, Tea, and Magdalena, for your support, and
kind comments.
I also would not be here if it were not for my family and (outside-the-program)
friends. Dad, I am sorry for forcing you to go to your workplace during your vacation,
and thank you for letting me borrow your office. Mom, thank you for reminding me
that I have humour. And to my partner and my friends, I will be back soon.
6
1. Introduction
1.1. Verbal Lie Detection and Credibility Criteria
It is not a rare phenomenon in criminal cases that technical evidence is scarce or non-
existent (Granhag et al., 2021). When this happens, the assessment of verbal statements
given by witnesses, victims, suspects, and defendants is of utmost importance, as the
verbal statements constitute the main part of the evidence. But how do we determine
whether someone is lying or telling the truth?
This question has baffled philosophers, researchers, and regular people for thousands
of years, giving rise to endless theories about lying and lie detection (Sporer and Masip,
2023). Even today, spotting a lie is a complex, perhaps impossible task for us humans.
Research has shown that humans, including trained judges and policemen, perform
just slightly above chance level (54%), when trying to determine whether someone is
lying or not (Bond and DePaulo, 2006).
Verbal lie detection (VLD) is the area of lie detection research where characteristics
in the language are used as a basis for assessing the veracity of a statement. One
key assumption (or working hypothesis) in VLD research is that there exist patterns
in the language of a person that is lying vs. telling the truth, that potentially could
discriminate deceptive statements from true ones in a systematic way.
Over the last decades, researchers of law and psychology have developed frameworks
that make use of linguistic content analysis as an aid for practitioners when assessing
the credibility of a statement. Some of the most renowned frameworks are Criteria-
Based Content Analysis (CBCA Steller and Koehnken, 1989), and Reality Monitoring
(RM Johnson and Raye, 1981). These frameworks propose a set of criteria that are
thought of as indicators of either truth or deception in a statement. In the Swedish
context, the Swedish Supreme Court has stated a set of credibility criteria,
1 formulated
to guide judges, jurymen, prosecutors, and other actors in the Swedish legal system in
assessing the credibility of a statement given in a criminal case. In 2017,2 it was stated
that a statement is more likely to be true if it is “clear”, “long” and “detailed”. Previous
descriptions of the criteria, which featured more cues such as “vivid” and “logical”,3
were criticized by forensic psychologists (R. M. Willén and Strömwall, 2012a), leading
to the exclusion of criteria between precedents. Given that the Swedish Supreme Court
has a large impact on the rest of the legal system through forming precedents (Schelin,
2006), the credibility criteria play a significant role in determining outcomes from
criminal cases on a national basis. Hence it is of utmost importance that they are
scrutinized scientifically.
Within the field of verbal lie detection, the accuracy and practical utility of criteria-
based frameworks are a popular subject of study, where meta-analyses have suggested
that implementing CBCA or RM yields an accuracy of around 70%, which is signifi-
cantly higher than basing the assessment purely on human intuition (Bogaard et al.,
2016; Vrij, 2005). There are, however, reasons to interpret results like these with caution
(Brennen and Magnussen, 2023). Although some studies use manual assessment to
1Sw. tillförlitlighetskriterier
2NJA 2017 p.316 I
3NJA 2010 p.671
7
score statements based on these frameworks, a growing amount of research use auto-
matic methods of text analysis, adapted from computational linguistics and natural
language processing (e.g. Hauch et al., 2015; Kleinberg et al., 2018; Levitan et al., 2018;
Newman et al., 2003; Papantoniou et al., 2022; Sarzyńska-Wawer et al., 2023; Solà-Sales
et al., 2023; Wawer and Sarzyńska-Wawer, 2022). Using computational methods for
verbal lie detection has two motives. For research purposes, it minimizes the need for
human-powered assessment of criteria or cue prevalence in the data, which can be
time-consuming, costly, and requires training (Hauch et al., 2016). There is also the
idea that automatic assessment diminishes the impact of human biases (Hauch et al.,
2015).
However, despite a reasonably large research base of verbal lie detection using com-
putational methods, this has not been done in a Swedish context. Additionally, previous
evaluations of the Swedish Supreme Court’s criteria and their stance on statement
analysis have been done purely from the perspective of law and forensic psychology
(Schelin, 2006; R. M. Willén and Strömwall, 2012a,b). We believe that extending the
research field of verbal lie detection to the Swedish context is of great importance
considering that criteria-based content analysis is a current recommendation from the
Swedish Supreme Court. We also believe that this field benefits from the enforcement
of computational methods to increase efficiency, reproducibility, and objectivity.
1.2. Purpose and Research Questions
Our main purpose for this study is to build on the existing research of verbal lie
detection using computational methods, extending the scope to include the Swedish
language. This is part of answering the larger question of how reliable the use of
criteria-based statement analysis is in reality. While this question is too vast to answer
in this thesis, we aim to provide a basis for further analysis, especially in the Swedish
context.
To achieve this, we collect a new Swedish data set that mimics statements that would
be given in a criminal case. We also develop a scheme for measuring the prevalence of
32 linguistic cues in Swedish statements and evaluating their diagnostic potential for
determining the veracity of a statement. Since our focus is on the Swedish context,
we derive our linguistic cues mainly from the Swedish Supreme Court’s credibility
criteria, and other commonly applied linguistic cues in previous research (Hauch et al.,
2015), adapting them to the Swedish language.
To bring some depth to our analysis, and given that previous research shows that
the diagnosticity of individual cues for verbal lie detection varies between studies,
sometimes even pointing in opposite directions (see meta-analyses by Gancedo et al.,
2021; Hauch et al., 2015), we want to explore the impact of the type of statement for the
diagnosticity of specific cues. Additionally, previous research has called for exploration
of how confessions and denials differ (Wojciechowski et al., 2018). Therefore, we
designed our data collection to generate a data set of four categories: true confessions,
false confessions, true denials, and false denials.
To deepen our analysis, we engaged a researcher of law to independently assess
the truthfulness of the statements based on her intuition. This allowed us to briefly
explore whether the prevalence of specific linguistic cues varies similarly based on
both the actual veracity of the statement and whether a human perceives it as true or
false, or if some cues are over- or under-estimated as indicators of truth or deception.
In summary, the following research questions are posed:
• How informative are the linguistic cues as indicators for truth or deception?
8
• Does it matter if the statement is a confession or a denial, regarding what cues
are discriminative?
• What characterizes statements that are thought to be true or false according
to human judgment? Are some linguistic cues over- or under-estimated as
indicators of truth or deception?
• How well does our proposed scheme separate true statements from false ones,
and what does this say about the reliability of the linguistic cues as indicators
of truth or deceit? What does it say about the Supreme Court’s criteria? What
does it say about other established approaches?
9
2. Background and Theory
2.1. Credibility Assessment and Lying
It is not a rare phenomenon in criminal investigations that technical evidence is
scarce or non-existent (Granhag et al., 2021). In these situations, the assessment of
verbal statements given by witnesses, victims, suspects, and defendants is of utmost
importance, as the verbal statements constitute the main part of the material available
for actors in the legal process to handle the case. The problem with this is that it is
easier said than done to decide whether someone is telling the truth or lying. Studies
show that humans, even trained police officers, and judges, only reach an accuracy
slightly above chance level (54%) on average when trying to conclude whether someone
is lying or not (Bond and DePaulo, 2006). In addition, studies have shown that human
judgments are biased in several ways. Stereotypical beliefs about how lying impacts
someone’s bodily behavior, such as facial expressions (Leach et al., 2016; Masip et al.,
2003), gaze aversion, and overall nervous behavior (Bogaard et al., 2016), as well as
other non-verbal cues, are generally over-estimated by practitioners as more telling
than what research shows (Bogaard et al., 2016; Vrij et al., 2022).
There are many reasons why lie detection is hard, and much of it goes beyond the
scope of this study. However, one aspect is that lies are complex in various ways.
First, there are different types of lies. In the context of criminal cases, which is
our focus here, a false statement from a suspect could be either a false denial or
a false confession. Falsely denying to have committed a crime is perhaps the most
straightforward case of lying since it is done to escape conviction and punishment,
but it is not the only one. Real examples of false confessions in the history of Swedish
law include the murders allegedly committed by Thomas Quick (Kwast, 2015), the
Kevin case (Slätt, 2020), and the case of Samir Sabri (Johansson and Sabri, 2017). All
these cases have in common that the statements where the alleged criminals confessed
were crucial for the final outcome. But, as it seems, none of the confessions were
true.1 Events where someone falsely confesses to a crime exist, and should be equally
important as false denials to capture, since if they are believed, as in the previously
mentioned cases, it also means that the real perpetrator is on the loose.
Second, lies as in false statements may not be entirely false. Liars may make use of
a real experience and embed the lies as details in an otherwise true account (Granhag
et al., 2021, p. 343). In a two-parted study on liars’ strategies for deceiving, a large
majority of participants (67% and 86% in the respective parts of the study) chose to
report an event that they had experienced themselves when asked to give a lying
statement (Leins et al., 2013). This had the effect that the majority of details reported
were in fact experienced, rather than fabricated.
2.2. Verbal Lie Detection
In order to facilitate the process of determining the veracity of statements in criminal
contexts, systematic ways of doing this have been developed within the research field
1According to general belief, since all of them have later been freed from the accusations, although
there may be discussions.
10
of verbal lie detection (VLD). A core theme of verbal lie detection is to perform lie
detection by looking at verbal cues as opposed to non-verbal cues. Empirical research
has repeatedly shown that non-verbal cues are unreliable and unstable to use for
credibility assessment (Bogaard et al., 2016; Granhag et al., 2021; Vrij et al., 2022).
Hence, the common belief is that verbal lie detection is the more promising area of lie
detection (Brennen and Magnussen, 2023; Vrij et al., 2022).
Verbal cues for lie detection have a long tradition. German and Swedish researchers
put together the first structured sets of verbal content criteria that were to be used
for assessing the veracity of statements in the 1950s (Arntzen, 1970; Trankell, 1982).
Today, some of the more known sets of criteria are the Criteria-Based Content Analysis
(CBCA Steller and Koehnken, 1989), and Reality Monitoring (RM Johnson and Raye,
1981). Since the 1980s, when the Swedish Supreme Court first used criteria to argue
that a statement was trustworthy, a form of statement analysis has been applied in
Swedish courts (Schelin, 2006).
The next sections give an overview of criteria that are applied in practice and in
verbal lie detection research. It goes beyond the scope of this thesis to present an
exhaustive walk-through of the criteria, mainly since there often is a lack of clear
interpretations. However, apart from the descriptions in the following sections, a
table can be found in the appendix (A.2) that displays lists of the criteria for each
framework, the general approaches presented, and our identified categories for cues to
be implemented. To bring some clarity to the complex matters, we have color-coded
criteria that relate to each other in one or two ways.
2.2.1. The Swedish Supreme Court’s Credibility Criteria
The legal system in Sweden is built on the principle of free production of evidence,
which makes it impossible for the system to direct any laws of how evidence should
be valued, and therefore also of how statement analysis should be practiced (Granhag
et al., 2021; Schelin, 2006). It is up to each individual judge to decide how the evidence
should be valued and whether a statement should be considered trustworthy or not
(Schelin, 2006). However, there is the possibility to consult precedents, which are
guiding judgments and rulings made by the Supreme Court. Creating precedents is
one of the key functions of the Supreme Court, meaning that their way of handling
a certain case constitutes the praxis, which courts in lower instances should mimic
(Granhag et al., 2021; Schelin, 2006).
The first enunciation given by the Swedish Supreme Court regarding statement
analysis was in 1980, connected to a case of rape, where the statement given by the
plaintiff was characterized as “coherent”, “clear”, and “detailed”, and was therefore
believed, leading to a conviction of the suspect.2 The potential value of applying
statement analysis with criteria was discussed by Schelin (2006), where she states that
it could work as a tool for the judge, in order to help them become more aware of
their process of making a judgment. It could work as an aid to question ideas and to
make a more structured deliberation before reaching a conclusion. However, she also
states that practitioners should not have too high expectations of what the analysis
can entail.
One of the latter precedents concerning statement analysis was given in 2010, on a
case of sexual assault.3 Here, it was stated that a statement is more likely to be true if
it is “clear”, “long”, “vivid”, “logical”, “rich in detail”, “proven true in important details”,
as well as “free from incorrect elements, contradictions, exaggerations, elements that
2NJA 1980 p 725
3NJA 2010 p 671
11
are difficult to explain”, “constancy deficits”, “poor coherence”, and “uncertainty on
crucial elements”.4
Researchers were not late to criticize these criteria, however (R. M. Willén and
Strömwall, 2012a), and some years later in 2017,5 the Swedish Supreme Court made a
new presentation of their credibility criteria. Now, the list was reduced to only contain
“clear”, “long”, and “detailed”. The criteria are not further described directly by the
Supreme Court.
As stated previously, the credibility assessment is a crucial part of the evidence
evaluation, especially when there is little or no technical evidence about the crime, as
in cases of rape or domestic violence. Since precedents from the Supreme Court are
used as examples throughout the Swedish legal system, this means that these criteria
may play a significant role in determining the outcome of a legal process regardless of
the instance. It is therefore of utmost importance that they are thoroughly examined
in research. Even though these criteria stand alone and are not considered part of any
larger framework, they share similarities with CBCA (see 2.2.2) and RM (see 2.2.3),
especially in the criteria related to details.
2.2.2. Criteria-Based Content Analysis (CBCA)
One of the most researched frameworks for content-based verbal lie detection is
criteria-based content analysis (CBCA). It was based on the “Reality Criteria” proposed
by Undeutsch (1967), and adapted by Steller and Koehnken (1989), to its current form.
CBCA consists of 19 criteria that are all thought to be more prevalent in truthful
statements (Vrij et al., 2022, pp. 2–3). The first 13 belong to the cognitive category,
responding to the idea that some features of a testimony are harder to fabricate, due
to them being more cognitively demanding. For example, criterion 3: total details -
the total amount of information conveyed, and criterion 4: contextual embeddings -
when and where things happened (Vrij et al., 2022, p. 2). The four remaining criteria
correspond to the idea that liars will be anxious about sounding suspicious, as they
speak since they think this would reveal that their story is inconsistent. For example,
criterion 14: spontaneous corrections - making corrections of their own testimony
without being prompted by the interviewer.
CBCA is part of a larger system called statement validity assessment (SVA) (Vrij et al.,
2022), which was initially built to aid the assessment of children’s testimonies in cases
of alleged sexual abuse. Its evaluation and implementation has extended to include
statements given by adults, and in other types of cases than sexual abuse, and it is one
of the most discussed frameworks in the literature. Hauch et al. (2016) argues that it
is often wrongfully treated as a lie detection or credibility assessment tool, although
CBCA was never meant to be used on its own, but as a step in the more thorough SVA,
where the output from the CBCA step is evaluated against a set of questions called a
“Validity Checklist” (Vrij et al., 2022, p. 2). However, this checklist, which for example
contains questions of whether the statement could have been produced even if the
person did not experience the event, lacks sufficient empirical evaluation and is not
standardized (Oberlader et al., 2020).
Studies show that the average accuracy of statement analysis using CBCA is around
70% (Amado et al., 2015; Vrij, 2005), which is significantly better than unaided as-
sessment based solely on intuition (Bogaard et al., 2016). However, in the context of
criminal law, where it has to be “beyond reasonable doubt” that someone tells the truth
4The author’s translation from Sw. klar, lång, levande, logisk, rik på detaljer, påvisat sanningsenlig i viktiga
enskildheter samt fri från felaktigheter, motsägelser, överdrifter, svårförklarliga moment, konstansbrister,
dåligt sammanhang eller tvekan i avgörande delar
5NJA 2017 p.316
12
or not, this level of certainty is not robust enough to be applied in practice, according
to Brennen and Magnussen (2023). Connected to the rather weak accuracy rate of
CBCA is the problem with decision boundaries. Practically speaking, there are no set
thresholds for when the criteria are sufficiently fulfilled, and if one were to adhere to
a decision boundary, the risk of false alarms is very high. As Brennen and Magnussen
(2022) exemplifies, applying CBCA with the right sensitivity to detect 95% of deceptive
statements also means allowing 75% of true statements to be wrongly classified as
false. This is a clear challenge for the practical utility of CBCA.
Another potential issue with CBCA is that finding many criteria in an account might
lead to a truth bias since the CBCA criteria are thought to be truth-indicative (Sporer
and Masip, 2023, p. 7).
2.2.3. Reality Monitoring (RM)
Reality Monitoring (RM) is a memory-based framework based on work by Johnson
and Raye (1981). Its key assumption is that memories of self-experienced events differ
from fabricated or imagined events in discriminative ways. According to the RM
rationale, real memories contain contextual information about time and space, sensory
or perceptual information, and semantic and cognitive operations.
RM criteria have been evaluated and applied in various studies (Bogaard et al., 2016;
Hwang et al., 2016; Thompson and Hartwig, 2022), and have reached results comparable
to the CBCA criteria (Masip et al., 2005). There is some support for the notion that
RM criteria can successfully discriminate between truthful and deceptive statements.
The meta-analysis by Hauch et al. (2015) found support for sensory and perceptual
details, but not for contextual embeddings. A recent meta-analysis exclusively on RM
criteria found support for the following criteria: clarity, sensory information, spatial
information, time information, reconstructability of the story, and realism (Gancedo
et al., 2021), but the only generalizable criterion was the time criterion since all of
the other criteria had studies where they were more prominent in false statements.
Gancedo et al. (2021) did not find any support for affective information.
Nahari (2023, p. 2) presents criticism towards research on RM, pointing out that
RM criteria is supposed to reflect what is missing in a false memory, but that it does
not hold anything specific for lies. She argues that it fails to consider the suspect’s
intentions, and questions the idea of validity as a deception indicator.
2.2.4. General Approaches
There are certain approaches for lie detection that are frequently discussed in VLD
literature. These are often connected to verbal cues that are examined in VLD research
but have mixed connections to the already discussed criteria.
Cognitive Load
Verbal cues related to cognitive load are present in both CBCA and RM. This perspective
holds that lying is more cognitively demanding than telling the truth and that therefore,
liars will have less “energy” to provide extensive, thought-through statements. Aspects
of a story that are considered harder to fabricate are therefore expected to be less
frequent in deceptive statements (Granhag et al., 2021, p. 344). In the meta-analysis by
Hauch et al. (2015), the cognitive load hypothesis is examined by evaluating length-
related cues such as word quantity and average sentence length, elaboration-related
cues such as content word diversity, and complexity-related cues such as verb quantity
and causation. They found that the cognitive load hypothesis was mainly supported.
13
Loconte et al. (2023) also found indications that cognitive load could be informative
for deception detection.
The Emotional Approach
The key idea behind the emotional approach is that a lying person will express different
emotions than a person who tells the truth (Granhag et al., 2021, p. 344). This is often
measured by counting words that express certain emotions or sentiments (using
e.g. LIWC, see 2.3.2), or implementing sentiment analysis (Papantoniou et al., 2022).
Different types of emotion or sentiment correlated cues have been found significant
in various studies (DePaulo et al., 2003; Hauch et al., 2015; Papantoniou et al., 2022;
Sarzyńska-Wawer et al., 2023).
Self-Distancing
The idea behind the self-distancing hypothesis is that a person who is lying will try to
create distance between themselves and the crime or course of events that they are
questioned about. One way of doing this might be to use fewer first-person pronouns,
more passive voice verbs, more past tense verbs, and fewer present tense verbs (Hauch
et al., 2015). This hypothesis has some support (Hauch et al., 2015; Levitan et al., 2018).
2.2.5. Challenges
Even though lie detection arguably might be less complicated for practitioners when
using the presented content-based frameworks, compared to relying on no theory at
all, there are challenges for research on VLD and the practical implementation of its
methods. This highlights some of the most crucial challenges for VLD and the validity
and practical implementation of VLD methods.
As exemplified in the sections about certain frameworks (Swedish Supreme Court’s
criteria 2.2.1, CBCA 2.2.2, RM 2.2.3) one challenge for VLD research is the difficulty
of acquiring relevant and adequate data sets. It is quite rare that experiments are
performed on data from real criminal cases, although exceptions exist (Thompson and
Hartwig, 2022). One reason for this is that it is often hard to know the ground truth
of statements produced in real-life settings (Vrij et al., 2010). This makes verbal lie
detection a tough subject to study, where it is often hard to draw clear conclusions
that are relevant for the practical implementation of its methods, such as using criteria
to determine veracity in courts.
Second, a multidimensional challenge is the combined effect of contextual factors
such as the type of criminal case, the seriousness of the crime, differences in language,
and cultural differences. These aspects have been addressed more in recent years than
earlier by researchers in VLD, but there remain still many gaps (Hwang et al., 2016;
Papantoniou et al., 2022; Sarzyńska-Wawer et al., 2023). The context dependency of
results is notable in the meta-analyses that are out there. The case is often that effect
sizes vary widely between different studies. For example, in the meta-analysis by
Hauch et al. (2015), it is shown that most of the cues vary between different studies,
even in the direction of effect. This means that one cue might be indicative of truth in
one study, but indicative of deception in another. For instance, in the meta-analysis
by Hauch et al. (2015), only two cues were found to have a consistent direction of
effect across the included studies. These were content word diversity6 and quantifier
frequency,7 which were consistently indicative of truth, in the 7 resp. 4 studies where
6See 3.2
7See 3.2
14
they were evaluated. Likewise, as mentioned earlier, the meta-study of RM criteria
by Gancedo et al. (2021) could only make generalizations for one criterion (temporal
details) since all the other criteria were ambiguous in their valence over various studies
included in the meta-analysis.
2.3. Empirical Studies
This section reviews a selection of prior studies on verbal lie detection (VLD) that are
relevant to our research, particularly in terms of experimental approaches involving
written statements and linguistic cues. Since previous VLD research in the Swedish
context has used manual methods for estimating criteria prevalence, we present these
studies in 2.3.1. We then transition to automated approaches utilizing computational
linguistics and NLP (see 2.3.2). The aim is to provide an overview of the key findings
from previous research, highlighting the specific linguistic cues, criteria, experimental
contexts, and methodologies employed. For a non-exhaustive overview of previous
results regarding specific cues, see Table A.1 in the appendix.
2.3.1. Manual Assessment
Previous research on credibility criteria and verbal lie detection in the Swedish context
has relied heavily on manual assessment when estimating the prevalence of these
criteria. Two notable studies examined true and false confessions using CBCA and
RM criteria (R. M. Willén and Strömwall, 2012b), as well as a set of criteria established
by the Swedish Supreme Court (R. M. Willén and Strömwall, 2012a). Both studies used
the same dataset, consisting of 60 transcribed interviews with convicted criminals, in
which participants provided true confessions of their crimes and fabricated confessions
for crimes they had not committed. In each case, trained student annotators manually
assessed the prevalence of different criteria.
In the study using the Swedish Supreme Court’s criteria, which included factors such
as length, coherence, clarity, details, difficult-to-explain points, credible impression,
and self-experience, only clarity was found to be statistically discriminative between
true and false confessions (R. M. Willén and Strömwall, 2012a). Similarly, the manual
assessment of CBCA and RM criteria revealed only small differences: self-deprecations
and doubts about one’s testimony were more common in lies, while unexpected
complications were more frequent in truths (R. M. Willén and Strömwall, 2012b).
Both studies concluded that the evaluated criteria sets (CBCA, RM, and the Swedish
Supreme Court) were not generally reliable in distinguishing between true and false
statements.
In another study by Wojciechowski et al. (2018), transcribed real-life criminal case
statements from Sweden and Poland were manually assessed using two frameworks:
SVA, which includes CBCA, and Multivariable Adults’ Statements Assessment Model
(MASAM), which is another content analysis framework. For the Swedish experiment,
law students were employed to determine the veracity of the statements. Some of
them were trained in statement analysis with MASAM and others read the statements
and judged according to their intuition. 17 true denials, 173 false denials, 170 true
confessions, and 8 false confessions were included in the data. Findings indicated that
the criteria significantly differed between true and false statements and that using
it raised the overall accuracy from 59.29% (untrained students) to 70.03% (students
using MASAM). However, the effects of the individual criteria were small, and it was
concluded that MASAM could not be classified as scientific evidence, as the system
does not discriminate statements beyond reasonable doubt.
15
Considering confessions and denials, this study found no significant differences
in the criteria scores depending on the type of statement. This may be attributed
to the unbalanced dataset used in the study, which highlights a research gap that
Wojciechowski et al. (2018) are also pointing out, that future research should further
evaluate differences between confessions and denials. Our study aims to address this
by providing a more balanced and comprehensive evaluation of both confessions and
denials.
2.3.2. Computational Methods
Stylometry and LIWC
Many, if not all, computational studies on verbal lie detection use some kind of
stylometry-oriented technique to estimate the prevalence of linguistic cues and criteria
in text (e.g. Newman et al., 2003; Papantoniou et al., 2022; Sarzyńska-Wawer et al.,
2023; Solà-Sales et al., 2023). Stylometry is a branch of computational linguistics that
revolves around extracting low-level verbal cues from text corpora to create linguistic
profiles that describe style in the language (Solà-Sales et al., 2023).
Newman et al. (2003) were one of the first studies to use computational methods for
verbal lie detection. They proposed that the linguistic style of a liar would be different
from a truth-teller, and used the later highly popular software Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC Pennebaker et al., 2001) to automatically extract stylometric
cues and other linguistically relevant features from verbal statements. LIWC is a
software that performs content analysis by counting occurrences of words from sets of
psychologically meaningful dictionaries and measuring standard linguistic features like
statement length, pronouns, articles and more (Pennebaker et al., 2001). Newman et al.
(2003) selected three categories of linguistic features from the LIWC framework: cues
pertaining to standard linguistic dimensions, psychological procedures, and relativity.
Out of five experiments featured in the study, one was conducted on a mock-crime
data set, similar to our study. The data was acquired by interrogating 60 psychology
students after half of them had been instructed to steal a dollar bill from a book inside
a room. All participants were asked to deny having taken the money, resulting in a
set of true and false denials. Results suggested that false denials had lower scores for
cognitive complexity, fewer self-references, more motion verbs, and more negative
emotion words. They also found that true denials had more first-person pronouns,
third-person pronouns, and exclusive words.
This study marked a turning point in verbal lie detection research, becoming a
foundational reference for later studies that have applied LIWC to replicate and extend
the analysis of linguistic cues and criteria for verbal lie detection. A meta-analysis by
Hauch et al. (2015) on 44 studies that studied true vs. false statements using computer-
ized analysis of different kinds, ascertained that over half of the studies used LIWC as
their main feature extractor.
Two later examples of studies using LIWC for verbal lie detection were conducted
by Levitan et al. (2018) and Thompson and Hartwig (2022).
In the study by Levitan et al. (2018), true and deceptive interview responses (tran-
scribed speech) to biographical questions (e.g. “Where were you born?” etc.), were
analyzed using LIWC and another dictionary-based program. Findings suggested that
deceptive statements were longer in duration, had higher word quantity, more words
per sentence, more vivid descriptions, more details in the form of adjectives, and more
hedge words, which was considered to signal a higher degree of self-distancing. Only
certainty measures and words indicating cognitive processes were truth-indicative.
Human judgments were also included in the comparison. The human judgments of the
16
statements were done by the interviewers (normal participants), who were asked to
decide whether they believed a statement or not upon hearing it from the interviewee.
Results showed that there were cues that the perceivers were correct in (word quantity),
cues that they missed (certainty measures), and cues that they overestimated (specific
denials, such as “I did not”).
Thompson and Hartwig (2022) collected transcribed real-life criminal case state-
ments from cases of sexually motivated homicides and used LIWC (Pennebaker et al.,
2001) to estimate criteria prevalence. The cues that they explored were derived from
the RM framework (see 2.2.3). Results showed that spatial and motion details were
significantly more prominent in true statements. They found no support for visual,
temporal, auditory, affective, or cognitive details.
Even though using LIWC is a common method for computational content analysis
for verbal lie detection, studies using other programs exist. A recent paper by Solà-
Sales et al. (2023) utilized another program for linguistic profiling, called Profiling-UD
(Brunato et al., 2020). From this program, they picked out 123 stylometric features
that were used in previous verbal lie detection research. The data used was witness
testimonies, and the results indicated that true testimonies were longer and had a
higher frequency of pronouns. Details as mentions of time and space, superfluous
details, people, and objects, were also more present overall in true testimonies. False
testimonies were more frequent in adjectives.
Another example is Sarzyńska-Wawer et al. (2023), who evaluated linguistic cues
on a data set of 1498 written and transcribed true or false opinion statements in
Polish. Instead of using LIWC, they opted for a Polish-specific sentiment analysis
tool, PoS-tagger, and Linguistic Category Model (LCM). According to their results,
false statements had less complex vocabulary, were more positive, less negative, and
more concise and concrete. They also found that the length of the statement was
truth-indicative.
The meta-analysis by Hauch et al. (2015) figures as an extensive reference for us in
what previous research has hitherto shown about computationally-aquired cues for
verbal lie detection. In total, Hauch et al. (2015) evaluated 77 linguistic cues, controlling
effect sizes for different moderating variables like type of event, motivation, interaction
levels, mode of production, and emotional valence. Likewise, they presented results
depending on these characteristics of the data. For our purposes, the results that corre-
spond to data similar to ours are highly relevant. This should be the results of data that
has first-person experience, low to medium motivation, computer-mediated commu-
nication, or typed statements. First-person experienced events yielded statements in
which negative emotions, emotions in general, and third-person pronouns were more
prominent in false accounts (Hauch et al., 2015, p. 325). Considering the section of low
to medium motivation, type-token ratio, and emotions were false indicative, while
word quantity, average sentence length, and sensory-perceptual processes were truth
indicative (Hauch et al., 2015, p. 326). For computer-mediated interaction between
who writes and who reads the statement, only word quantity was significant, indicat-
ing a false statement (Hauch et al., 2015, p. 326). Lastly, given that our data is typed,
results from the meta-analysis suggested that word quantity and references to space
were truth indicative while expressing emotions was false indicative (Hauch et al.,
2015, p. 327). As previously mentioned, the meta-analysis by Hauch et al. (2015) also
displayed large variations in the direction of the effect of included studies, probably
largely depending on the type of data used in each study.
Overall, despite their long-standing presence and relative simplicity, stylometric
approaches continue to hold significant value in verbal lie detection, even though they
may seem somewhat simplistic or naïve from a modern NLP perspective. In a recent
study by Loconte et al. (2023), stylometric analysis using LIWC was incorporated to
17
enhance the interpretability of their primary approach, which was to fine-tune a large
language model (LLM) for detecting deception. Through this analysis, they identified
that features related to cognitive load, such as statement length and complexity, could
play an important role in the model’s performance, as these seemed more prominent
among correct classifications.
Their results also suggest that, despite LLMs achieving a high level of linguistic
pattern recognition, they still struggle to generalize deception-related features across
different datasets. In the field of verbal lie detection, explainability and interpretability
are essential, as relying on models without understanding their decision-making
processes is unacceptable. This highlights one reason why stylometric analysis remains
a valuable tool, ensuring transparency and insight into what patterns may differ
between true and false. The difficulty of the LLM to generalize also potentially hints
at the complexity of the task, and that different data sets often show different patterns
as indicative of truth or deception, as they compared their model on three different
data sets.
Pre-Trained Models
In recent years, large language models have been used for a wide range of purposes
where rule-based or dictionary-based approaches previously dominated the field.
Researchers in verbal lie detection are no exception to the hype, and there is a growing
body of research applying pre-trained models to estimate criteria prevalence and to
build classifiers (e.g. Kleinberg et al., 2018; Loconte et al., 2023; Papantoniou et al.,
2022; Wawer and Sarzyńska-Wawer, 2022). Since our focus is on the reliability of cues
and criteria, rather than finding the best existing machine-learning approaches for
building a lie detector, we will focus on the use of pre-trained models as extractors of
linguistic cues from text.
One such type of pre-trained models is named entity recognition (NER) models.
NER was first proposed for verbal lie detection by Kleinberg et al. (2018) in a study on
hotel reviews, where NER features were compared to features acquired by the LIWC
program. Results suggested that NER could be useful for extracting linguistic cues
for deception detection and even seemed to outperform the discriminative power of
richness of detail calculated using LIWC.
As previously mentioned, Loconte et al. (2023) conducted a study on applying large
language models for verbal lie detection. We previously mentioned the stylometric
aspect of their study, which among other variables contained measurements of cues
extracted using LIWC. Inspired by Kleinberg et al. (2018), this list of stylometric
features also contained named entity recognition (NER) objects, as a way of measuring
details. Their results showed that NER categories people, temporal details, spatial
details, and the combined quantity of details (NER categories summed) significantly
discriminated true and deceptive statements in the memory-based data set that they
used. All NER features except for references to people were truth-indicative.
Another linguistic cue that has been applied with pre-trained models is sentiment
analysis, which has been connected to the emotional approach. In a study on the
cultural differences in feature relevance for verbal lie detection, Papantoniou et al.
(2022) implemented various language-specific sentiment analysis tools on the five lan-
guages they included in their study (English, Russian, Dutch, Spanish, and Romanian)
and found that the expression of sentiment was to some degree culture-dependent.
For our purposes, the most interesting result is that positive sentiment was more
prevalent in deceptive language in individualistic cultures (USA) (since Sweden would
be considered an individualistic country).
18
3. Method
In this section, the research design of this study is presented. In summary, our study
involves the collection of a new dataset (see 3.1), the selection of linguistic cues (see
3.2.1), the implementation of these linguistic cues (see 3.2.2), and a statistical evaluation
(see 3.3).
The code for the analysis is available on GitHub.1
3.1. Data Collection
3.1.1. Overview
For the purpose of this study to extend VLD to Swedish, a new Swedish dataset of
four categories of statements: true confessions, true denials, false confessions, and
false denials was collected. The data set was collected jointly by the author and one
of the supervisors, within the research project EB-CRIME (see Preface). This section
describes how the dataset was collected, what stimuli were used, and how the raw
data was prepared to be fit for analysis. We also discuss some limitations.
Table 3.1 displays the number of statements that were collected, including how
many were confessions and denials, and how many were believed (judged to be true)
and not believed (judged to be false). The resulting dataset consists of 251 statements,
of which 52.6% (n=132) were true and 47.4% (n=119) false. Additionally, 51.4% (n=129)
were confessions, 48.6% (n=122) were denials; 38.2% (n=96) were believed, and 61.8%
(n=155) were not believed.
Valence Statement Type Believed Not Believed Total
True Confession 44 21 65
Denial 22 45 67
Total 66 66 132
False Confession 22 42 64
Denial 8 47 55
Total 30 89 119
Total 96 155 251
Table 3.1.: Number of statements for each category and subcategory of the data set.
Distribution
The data was collected through a questionnaire implemented with Qualtrics2. Partici-
pants were employed through three main groups: technical and administrative (TeA)
staff at Uppsala University, who were invited through an email list; contacts on social
media, who were invited to the study through an open link that was distributed on
1https://github.com/claraagu/ma_thesis_VLD
2https://www.qualtrics.com/
19
Facebook and LinkedIn by the author and supervisors; and participants from Prolific3
.
Prolific is a crowd-sourcing agent that is commonly used for academic purposes. 66.5%
(n=167) participated via Prolific, and 33.5% (n=84) were reached through the TeA group
and social media.
Participants
All participants were located in Sweden, with Swedish as their native language. The
age range was 18 to 73, with a median of 33 (mean = 35.77, st.dev. = 12.84). Out of all
participants, 131 were men, 120 were women and three identified as non-binary. In
total, 84 participants were reached through social media and among the TeA group.
The rest, 167 participants, participated through Prolific.
Compensation
Compensation differed depending on the sample. Regular participants (from social
media and the TeA group) were offered a movie ticket (worth 150 SEK) if they managed
to convince that their story was correct. If their statement was regarded as non-believed,
they did not receive any compensation. This was to create an incentive to persuade, to
make up for the absence of motivation to save one’s skin that a suspect would feel in
a real criminal case. The Prolific sample differed compared to the other participants
in the way they were paid, as they were paid through Prolific, and received the same
compensation regardless of whether their response was useful for us or not.
3.1.2. Stimuli and Instructions
Here, the stimuli that were presented to the participants in the questionnaire are
presented.
Introduction and General Instructions
First off, the participants were given a short introduction to statement analysis in the
context of criminal law and that it is used to help practitioners tell whether someone
is lying or telling the truth. They are informed that the focus of the research is to
evaluate methods of statement analysis.
They are then informed about the overall outline of the test, that they will be
presented with a video where a person is either committing a crime or not, and that
they should imagine that they are this person. Next, they have the opportunity to save
the information they have been given so far into a PDF and are then asked to consent
to participation.
After giving information about age and gender identity, they are informed that they
will be assigned one of four scenarios: committing the crime and then telling the truth
about it (true confession); committing the crime and lying about it (false denial); not
committing the crime and telling the truth about it (true denial); not committing the
crime and lying about it (false confession). Thereafter, they are informed that they
will give a statement to the police.4 Here, they are also reminded that they will be
rewarded with a movie ticket if they manage to create a convincing statement.5
3https://www.prolific.com/
4It is specified that the police here is fictitious and that in reality researchers will evaluate their statement.
5This information was also included in the invitation letter.
20
Video Stimuli
In the next stage, each participant was randomized to one of the previously stated
scenarios. They are informed that they will watch a video that depicts a person walking
up to their apartment building, entering, and finding a package addressed to their
neighbour Leonard.
Here, the continuation varies depending on the scenario. For the guilty scenarios
(true confession and false denial), the participants are presented with a video of a person
stealing a package from an open post box. For the true denial and false confession
scenario, they are presented with a video where a person sees a package lying on the
open post box, and then proceeds to enter their apartment.
Figure 3.1.: Screenshots from different parts of the guilty vs. innocent video clips.
Figure 3.1 displays some scenes from the videos. The first row shows the video
where the crime is committed. As one can see, the main difference between the guilty
scenarios and the innocent scenarios is that the package is not grabbed in the innocent
video. Here, the person notices the package but immediately turns to the door. Both
videos end with the hallway floor of the person’s apartment. In the innocent version,
the floor is empty, and in the guilty version, the person puts the package on the hallway
floor. The videos were made as similar as possible to lower the risk of contaminating
the experience with irrelevant information and to ensure that the experience of the
scenarios would only differ in whether the person committed the crime or not.
Continuation of Scenarios
After watching the video, they were informed through text that the package contained
a new Macbook laptop worth 25000 SEK. The guilty participants were asked to imagine
that they exited their apartment during the night and threw the package in a nearby
garbage station. The innocent participants were informed that their neighbour Mats,
who they met at the garbage station, told the participant about Leonard’s lost package.
Prompt
In the next step, all participants were informed that the next day the police knocked
on the door and asked for any observations or relevant information about the crime.
21
Now, the participant is asked to give their statement in written form, as if they
were speaking directly to the police. They are encouraged to spend around 10 minutes
writing their statement, to increase the chance that we were going to get statements
that are long enough to analyze computationally.
Before giving their statement, they were asked a control question to make sure
they understood the assignment. For example, the false denial scenario was asked to
indicate that they were to lie and say that they did not take the package.
The final prompt can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2.: Example of the slot in the questionnaire where the participant is asked to give
their statement. Eng. Please write below what you tell the police to convince them
that your statement is true. Note that “the police” here only relates to a fictitious
police in the presented scenario. It is us researchers, not the police, that will examine
your statement.
3.1.3. Data Preparation
All statements were manually assessed to ensure that the participants had understood
the assignment and answered accordingly to what they were asked to do. In some
cases, it was clear that participants misunderstood the question or were confused
and for example, gave a true confession instead of a true denial. Statements of this
kind were excluded. Additionally, each statement was annotated as convincing or not
convincing by a researcher in law. This resembled how a legal actor judges according
to their intuition. This annotation was used to decide which participants would receive
compensation (movie ticket), and to conduct further comparisons in the data, looking
at what cues are more prevalent in statements that are believed vs. not believed.
Spell correction was also done, using MS Excel’s built-in spell-checker and manually
accepting or rejecting proposals for spell correction, based on their fitness. This was
done to enhance the performance of the implemented models for PoS-tagging, NER,
and sentiment analysis (see the sections covering the cues 3.2).
3.1.4. Limitations
There are some limitations in our method of accumulating statements that will be
addressed here.
First, as mentioned above, the motivational aspect of synthesizing the statements
is one aspect where our data differs from real-life statements in the criminal context.
We offered a bait in the sense of a positive reward for those who managed to appear
trustworthy. This is however a positive motivation, getting a reward, while in a real
case, the motivation would be negative, to not receive punishment. This may impact
the nature of the statements.
Second, we asked the participants to give their statements as if they were talking
directly to the police. However, collecting statements as text through a questionnaire
22
introduces the opportunity to plan and review the statement in a different way than
would be possible if the statement was given verbally, immediately to the police. We
did not control for the time that the participants spent constructing their statements.
Third, the participants’ experience of the event is somewhat limited to their imagi-
native abilities. They are shown a video and asked to put themselves into the scenario.
In summary, the statements in this dataset should not be considered to perfectly
resemble statements given in real criminal cases. There may be differences between
this dataset and authentic statements, and therefore the implications of this study are
not directly transferable to real criminal cases.
However, given the precautions we have taken, and since it is hard to retrieve data
from real criminal cases where the ground truth is known, we consider this dataset to
still hold great value. It is comparable in size to other smaller studies on mock crime
scenarios in English (Hwang et al., 2016) and Spanish (Solà-Sales et al., 2023), and it
enables us to effectively implement and evaluate linguistic cues on Swedish written
data. Our data set is to the best of our knowledge unique in that it is a balanced set of
true vs. false confessions and denials.
3.2. Linguistic Cues
3.2.1. Selection
The selection of cues was based on three considerations: 1) relevance to the field, 2)
relevance to the Swedish Supreme Court’s criteria, 3) applicability on Swedish data.
Relevance to the field was important to put our results into context, and make sure our
results would be comparable to previous research in the field. For the Swedish Supreme
Court’s criteria, we focused on finding criteria that would resemble approximations
of a statement’s length, clarity, and richness of detail. Lastly, we had to consider the
applicability of the cues to the Swedish data.
As noted in 2.3.2, many studies in verbal lie detection use a software called Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC, Pennebaker et al., 2001). Since there is no official
Swedish version of this program, and the fact that no previous studies have evaluated
VLD cues with computational methods on Swedish, our implementations are largely
experimental.
Seven categories of cues were established, that could be implemented on our data,
based on referenced criteria (see 2.2 and Table A.2 in the appendix), and the review
of previous empirical studies (see 2.3). These categories are length, clarity, part-of-
speech tags, lexical variation, named-entity-recognition (NER), sentiment, and self-
distancing. An overview of the resulting cues, including their predicted direction of
effect, according to results of previous studies, and references to papers that have
implemented them, can be found in the appendix (Table A.1).
3.2.2. Coding
Following the appeals of Nahari (2023) to cleave to existing coding schemes, we aim to
use the same coding as specified in Hauch et al. (2015) and other previous work where
possible. Since we are working with Swedish, however, we have had to make some
more experimental coding choices.
In the following section, the coding of each cue is described under its corresponding
category.
23
Length
Number of tokens is calculated by counting the number of tokens for each statement,
including punctuation. Tokenization was done using the Natural Language Toolkit
(NLTK) (Bird et al., 2009) word_tokenizer for Swedish.
Average token length is calculated by summing the length of each word in the tok-
enized statement and dividing the sum by the number of tokens for that statement.
Punctuation is included.
Number of sentences is calculated by splitting each statement into sentences using
NLTK’s sent_tokenize and counting the number of sentences.
Average sentence length is calculated by summing the number of tokens in the whole
statement and dividing by the number of sentences in that statement.
Clarity
LIX Readability Score is a measure of the readability of a text developed by Björnsson
(1968). It is based on three values: number of tokens, number of sentences, and number
of tokens longer than six letters (see equation 3.1). It gives a score of how easy a text
is to read. We propose this experimentally as a potential measure for the clarity of a
statement.
𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠
𝐿𝐼𝑋=
+𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔_
𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠·100
𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 (3.1)
𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠
Parts-of-Speech (PoS)
Frequencies of PoS-tags are estimated by counting the number of part-of-speech tags
indicating adjectives, adverbs, nouns, verbs, pronouns, and numerals, dividing by the
number of tokens for that statement. Each explored PoS-tag results in one estimated
density measure for the statement. SpaCy’s Swedish pipeline with ’sw-news-core-lg’6
is utilized for PoS-tagging.
Named Entity Recognition (NER)
Frequencies of NER objects included in the Swedish pipeline from SpaCy:7 time, loca-
tion, person, event, measurement (MSR), organization, work. The reported accuracy
evaluation of the SpaCy model’s performance for NER is 86% precision, 76% recall,
and 81% F1-score. Following the implementation scheme by Kleinberg et al. (2018),
occurrences of unique named entities are calculated and divided by the length of the
statement. Using only unique named entities is motivated by Kleinberg et al. (2018)
with that CBCA and RM do not include any requirement for repeated details. We
chose to follow this schema for increased comparability. The model is trained on the
Stockholm-Umeå Corpus v.3.0 (SUX 3.0, Språkbanken Text, 2024), consisting of various
domains of Swedish text like novels and news media texts. The data is annotated with
manually acquired name tags inherited from an earlier version of the corpus (SUC 2.0),
and with automatically acquired named entity tags through Sparv8
.
6https://spacy.io/models/sv#sv_core_news_lg
7See footnote 6.
8https://spraakbanken.gu.se/resurser/sucx3
24
Lexical Variation
Type-Token Ratio (TTR) is estimated by dividing the number of unique tokens by the
total number of tokens for that statement. The tokens are uncased before calculating
occurrences. TTR gives a sense of how diverse the vocabulary of the statement is
and how much of the vocabulary is recycled. It is a value between 0 and 1, where 1
indicates that every word is used only once, and a lower value indicates that words
are used more than once.
Word Variation Index (OVIX) measures how much variation there is in the vocabulary
of a text, similar to type-token ratio, but less dependent on the length of the text. The
higher the value, the more words are used only once. See equation 3.2. OVIX is used
experimentally as an alternative to TTR.
𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠)
𝑂𝑉𝐼𝑋=
(3.2)
𝑙𝑜𝑔(2−
𝑙𝑜𝑔 (𝑡 𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑠 )
𝑙𝑜𝑔 (𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 ))
Content Word Diversity is calculated by removing stopwords using NLTK (Bird et al.,
2009), leaving only the content words of each statement to be counted. The number of
unique content words is then divided by the number of observed content words in the
statement. The example below shows the input (1) and output (2) of this procedure. The
tokens are uncased before calculating occurrences. Content word diversity is similar
to type-token ratio but more specific since it measures how diverse the statement is
regarding lexical content.
1. full sentence: [’Ja’, ’jag’, ’var’, ’på’, ’väg’, ’hem’, ’efter’, ’en’, ’lång’, ’dag’, ’på’,
’jobbet’, ’och’, ’det’, ’var’, ’en’, ’sån’, ’där’, ’dag’, ’som’, ’kändes’, ’som’, ’evigheter’]
2. content words: [’Ja’, ’väg’, ’hem’, ’lång’, ’dag’, ’jobbet’, ’sån’, ’dag’, ’kändes’,
’evigheter’]
Sentiment
Inspired by Papantoniou et al. (2022), we implement three different ways of estimating
the sentiment of each statement:
VaderSentiment for Swedish9 is a lexicon and rule-based tool for sentiment analysis
that has been adapted for Swedish from the VADER Sentiment Analysis.10 It is special-
ized in social media text and computes four different scores: negative, positive, neutral,
and compound, of which we use the first three. The negative, positive, and neutral
make a multidimensional measure of sentiment for a given sentence.
KBLab Sentiment Analysis11 is a multi-label sentiment classifier finetuned on Megatron-
BERT-large-165K.12 It is trained on five datasets: 17.6% Trustpilot reviews, 16.1% Twitter
posts, 5.4% news headlines, 54.1% machine-translated reviews in Norwegian, and 6.8%
texts about immigration from news and social media. The datasets differ in domain,
quality, and to some extent annotation scheme (Hägglöf, 2023).
It classifies texts as negative, neutral, or positive, and emits a score between 0 and 1,
indicating the strength of the classification (Hägglöf, 2023). For each label, one function
was built that recognized the label and saved the score in the appropriate column for
9https://github.com/AlexGustafsson/vaderSentiment-swedish
10https://github.com/cjhutto/vaderSentiment
11https://huggingface.co/KBLab/robust-swedish-sentiment-multiclass
12https://huggingface.co/KBLab/megatron-bert-large-swedish-cased-165k
25
that label.
BERT Sentiment Analysis13 is a sentiment analysis model based on BERT for Swedish14
and fine-tuned on around 20k App Store reviews in Swedish. Similar to the KBLab
pipeline, it predicts a label and a score for each statement. However, in this model, the
labels are restricted to either positive or negative.
Self-Distancing
Personal Pronouns are counted using word lists of first-, second-, and third-person
pronouns put together by the author. We only include singular and plural animate
personal pronouns in subject and object form. However, note that ’er’ is homonymous
with the plural possessive pronoun, and that ’de’ and ’dem’ are the same for inanimate
plural personal pronouns. Occurrences of each type of pronoun are summed and
divided by the length of the statement. The tokens are uncased before calculating
occurrences. The following word lists are used:
• 1st person: [’jag’, ’mig’, ’vi’, ’oss’]
• 2nd person: [’du’, ’dig’, ’ni’, ’er’]
• 3rd person: [’han’, ’hon’, ’hen’, ’honom’, ’henne’, ’de’, ’dem’]
Verb Tenses are counted using the PoS-tag information from the SpaCy model15
.
Occurrences are divided by the number of tokens in the statement.
3.3. Statistical Evaluation
The statistical evaluation was done in three steps, inspired by the logistic regression
analysis done by Papantoniou et al. (2022). We followed their steps, as is first to do
Mann-Whitney U-tests, followed by correlation analysis to filter the cues, and lastly,
multiple logistic regression.
The Mann-Whitney U-test is a non-parametric alternative to the t-test, which
we found suitable since a large part of our data violated the assumptions of normal
distribution and homogeneity of variance. The direction of effect was determined using
one-tailed U-tests, only when significance had already been shown by the two-tailed
test. Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U-tests were applied to evaluate whether there were
differences in the distributions of each cue in paired subcategories of the data (true
vs. false, confessions vs. denials, true confessions vs. false confessions, true denials vs.
false denials, and believed vs. non-believed statements). If the cue was significantly
more prevalent in one of the two subcategories, the cue was considered informative
and indicative of that type of statement. This corresponds to our research question
of which cues are informative for verbal lie detection. By including a comparison
between confessions and denials, as well as truth and falsehood within the two types
of statements, we were able to evaluate differences that might be conditioned to the
type of statement. This corresponds to the research question of whether it matters if the
statement is a confession or a denial. Analyzing believed vs. non-believed statements,
and comparing them to true vs. false allowed us to answer the research question of
13https://huggingface.co/marma/bert-base-swedish-cased-sentiment
14https://huggingface.co/KB/bert-base-swedish-cased
15https://spacy.io/models/sv#sv_core_news_lg
26
what characterizes statements that are thought to be true or false according to human
judgment.
Next, for each comparison, the significant cues (p<0.05) were filtered based on
correlation. This was done to diminish the impact of collinearity, which otherwise
could inflate the coefficients of the multiple logistic regression. Reducing correlation
means we could be more sure that the regression showed us reliable strength measures
(coefficients). The correlation filtering was done as follows: Between cues that correlate
with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.40 or more, the cue with the highest p-value
was omitted. The threshold for Pearson’s correlation coefficient was set to 0.40 to allow
some correlation. The resulting list was then filtered again, based on the variance
inflation factors (VIF) of the included features. VIF was calculated for every cue in
the remaining list, and the cue with the highest value was omitted until all included
cues had a VIF below the set threshold. The threshold for VIF was set to 10, which is a
common rule of thumb for estimating multicollinearity16
.
Having reselected the most discriminative cues using the significance tests, and
picked out the least correlated set among these, according to the mentioned thresholds,
we proceeded to fit a logistic regression model. The goal of the regression analysis
is to see how well the "best" cues separate the true statements from false ones and
to estimate their relative strength, which corresponds to the research questions of
the adequacy of our method and which cues are the most informative. The overall
performance is measured with F1-score and confusion matrices. The cues’ coefficients
were analyzed to evaluate their relative strength. We apply the regression analysis
for true vs. false, confessions vs. denials, and true vs. false within confessions and
denials. Using the most significant and least correlated cues allowed us to evaluate a
few selected cues that each describe one independent characteristic in the language
that indicates truth or deception. Comparing their coefficients, and assessing the
discriminative performance of the model, gave us a hint of how reliable they would be
to use as criteria. The intuition was that the F1 score of the regression model would
reflect an approximate best-case scenario of the cues’ combined information content.
We used Scikit Learn’s LogisticRegressionCV, which is built to fit a logistic regression
with 5-fold cross-validation (Pedregosa et al., 2011). The data was scaled using Scikit
Learn’s StandardScaler before fitting the regression models (Pedregosa et al., 2011).
Apart from the F1 score and the coefficients, we also looked at the models’ confidence
scores, which are based on the decision function.17 These are proportional to the
distance between the data points and the hyperplane. The average confidence scores
for each subcategory were calculated. Comparing the F1 score to the confidence values
for each model, we should be able to say something about how successful the separation
is, whether one class was harder to classify and whether the models were over- or
under-confident. This gives insight into the reliability of our method.
As a way of visualizing the discriminative power of the cues, we also applied
dimensionality reduction using UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018), on the full set of cues vs.
on the set used in the respective multiple logistic regression model. This was done
to enable plotting the data and comparing the representation of the data based on
all cues vs. the most informative cues. In the ideal scenario, if the cues were largely
informative for verbal lie detection, the categories should be clustered according to
their valence.
16See for example https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat462/node/180/.
17See documentation for the LogisticRegressionCV at https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegressionCV.html
27
4. Results
In this section, results from statistical analysis of the distributions of the cues are
presented. First, we explore the whole dataset from the angle of true vs. false (section
4.1). Second, we compare confessions and denials (section 4.2). Third, we look into
true vs. false within the confessions and denials respectively (section 4.3). Lastly, we
compare significance results from true vs. false with the results from believed vs. not
believed (section 4.4).
4.1. True vs. False
Table 4.1 displays the results from the Mann-Whitney significance tests on true vs. false
statements, with means, standard deviations, and sparsity for each cue. For the true vs.
false analysis of the data, five cues stood out as statistically significant. Type-token
ratio (p=0.018), content word diversity (p<0.000), positive sentiment (V) (p=0.017)
and present tense verbs (p=0.010) were indicative of a false statement to a significant
degree. The only significant truth-indicative cue was past tense verbs (p=0.004).
Some other cues yielded low p-values. Token quantity (p=0.071) and sentence
quantity (p=0.188) hint that true statements were longer than false statements, although
the difference was not statistically significant. True statements also seem to have been
less frequent in nouns (p=0.068). On the other hand, adjectives (p=0.150), adverbs
(p=0.122), and verbs (p=0.118) seem to have been slightly more frequent in false
statements. References to locations were more frequent in true statements than false
statements (p=0.100), but had very high sparsity, as was the case for all NER object
counts. The standard deviations were higher than the mean for all NER counts, again
showing that only a few statements contained recognizable NER objects. Interestingly,
neutral sentiment scores also yielded close-to-significant p-values, but in opposite
directions. Vader’s neutral sentiment was higher in true statements (p=0.058) while
KBLab’s neutral sentiment score was higher in false statements (p=0.092).
Considering the self-distancing hypothesis, no significance was found for the type
of pronouns used. All statements had higher frequencies of first-person pronouns than
second or third-person pronouns. However, present tense verbs were more frequent in
false statements (p=0.010), and past tense verbs were more frequent in true statements
(p=0.004).
Filtering correlated cues from the five significant ones, three significant features were
left for the regression model. These were content word diversity, positive sentiment
(V), and past tense verbs. Table 4.2 displays the results from the multiple logistic
regression (MLR) model.
Comparing the coefficients of these three features suggests that content word
diversity was the most informative one, followed by positive sentiment (V), and past
tense. Considering the VIF scores, however, positive sentiment might be the most
informative isolated cue, since it has the lowest VIF. Based on the information contained
in these three features, the model formed a hyperplane that correctly separated the
statements with an F1-score of 67.4%. True statements seem to have been easier to
separate correctly, according to the confusion matrix in Figure 4.1, which shows a
higher precision for true statements than for false statements. Note that the total
number of true statements (n=132) is higher than the number of false statements
28
Category Feature U-stat Mean T (𝜎) Mean F (𝜎) p DOE Sparsity
Length Token quantity 8891.5 143.758 (112.131) 121.076 (85.883) 0.071 - 0.000
Avg. token length 7992.0 3.882 (0.276) 3.883 (0.285) 0.811 - 0.000
Sent. quantity 8607.0 7.977 (6.637) 6.630 (4.406) 0.188 - 0.000
Avg. sent. length 8047.0 19.078 (6.508) 18.392 (5.680) 0.737 - 0.000
Clarity LIX 8439.5 31.313 (7.667) 30.046 (7.395) 0.308 - 0.000
PoS Adjectives 7026.5 0.032 (0.019) 0.037 (0.022) 0.150 - 0.108
Adverbs 6964.5 0.110 (0.043) 0.120 (0.041) 0.122 - 0.004
Nouns 8904.0 0.125 (0.037) 0.114 (0.038) 0.068 - 0.008
Verbs 7097.0 0.204 (0.029) 0.209 (0.029) 0.188 - 0.000
Pronouns 7968.0 0.152 (0.033) 0.155 (0.038) 0.843 - 0.000
Numerals 7693.0 0.001 (0.004) 0.002 (0.005) 0.661 - 0.841
Lexical
variation
TTR* 6496.5 0.616 (0.112) 0.656 (0.126) 0.018 F 0.000
OVIX 7405.5 50.711 (14.085) 51.217 (19.379) 0.435 - 0.020
CWD** 5853.0 0.757 (0.083) 0.797 (0.094) 0.000 F 0.000
NER Time 7742.0 0.137 (0.502) 0.269 (1.071) 0.714 - 0.896
Location 8032.5 0.010 (0.071) 0.000 (0.000) 0.100 - 0.988
Person 8319.5 0.841 (1.140) 0.783 (1.270) 0.380 - 0.530
MSR 7913.5 0.012 (0.142) 0.000 (0.000) 0.346 - 0.996
Organisation 7770.5 0.013 (0.091) 0.018 (0.106) 0.612 - 0.972
Sentiment Negative (V) 8018.5 0.069 (0.040) 0.078 (0.076) 0.775 - 0.112
Neutral (V) 8945.0 0.895 (0.051) 0.870 (0.083) 0.058 - 0.000
Positive (V)* 6502.0 0.036 (0.035) 0.052 (0.046) 0.017 F 0.275
Negative (KB) 8063.0 0.213 (0.351) 0.191 (0.332) 0.643 - 0.729
Positive (KB) 7722.0 0.000 (0.000) 0.012 (0.091) 0.137 - 0.992
Neutral (KB) 6898.5 0.540 (0.366) 0.584 (0.376) 0.092 - 0.287
Negative (B) 8334.0 0.949 (0.207) 0.945 (0.218) 0.404 - 0.048
Positive (B) 7692.0 0.029 (0.165) 0.050 (0.216) 0.407 - 0.960
Self-
distancing
1st person 8541.0 0.093 (0.028) 0.089 (0.027) 0.232 - 0.000
2nd person 8352.5 0.005 (0.010) 0.003 (0.007) 0.290 - 0.689
3rd person 7335.5 0.005 (0.010) 0.007 (0.013) 0.307 - 0.606
Present tense* 6372.0 0.044 (0.032) 0.055 (0.035) 0.010 F 0.104
Past tense* 9507.5 0.116 (0.040) 0.101 (0.048) 0.004 T 0.020
Table 4.1.: Results from Mann-Whitney U-tests on the distributions of scores in true vs. false
statements for each feature (cue). The direction of effect (DOE) is indicated as
significant cues. Sparsity refers to the proportion of zero values among samples.
Significance indications: * p <0.05, ** p <0.0015625 (Bonferroni corrected). 𝜎=
standard deviation.
(n=119). This might influence the result here. However, considering the confidence
values (Table 4.2), which are slightly higher for false statements (58.4%) compared to
true statements (57.2%), it seems to be the other way around, even if the difference is
small.
Figure 4.2 displays two-dimensional UMAP projections using all 32 cues (A) vs. only
the three cues (B) that were included in the MLR model. The different sets of features
did change the disposition of the cues. It seems as though the projection with the
significant cues is slightly more clustered.
4.2. Confession vs. Denial
Since our experiment featured two different ways of lying (false confession, false
denial), and two different ways of telling the truth (true confession, true denial), it is
of interest for our study to examine how the linguistic cues vary between confessions
and denials. This section presents the results from the analysis of the confession vs.
denial split of the data set.
29
Feature Coefficient DOE VIF
CWD -0.485 F 8.378
Positive (V) -0.331 F 2.182
Past Tense 0.271 T 6.610
Confidence (T/F) 0.577 (0.572/0.584)
F1-score 0.674
Table 4.2.: Results from multiple logistic re-
gression (MLR) on the true vs.
false data split. DOE = direction
of effect. VIF = variance inflation
factor. See 3.3 for more details.
Figure 4.1.: Confusion matrix classification
of true vs. false statements
based on the MLR model.
(a) True vs. false with all cues. (b) True vs. false with the remaining cues after fil-
tering out insignificant and collinear cues.
Figure 4.2.: UMAP dimensionality reduction projections of the with all 32 cues (a), and the 3
cues used in MLR model (b).
30
In general, we found larger differences between confessions and denials than be-
tween true and false statements. Ten cues stood out as significantly more prominent
in confessions, and seven cues were more prominent in denials. Table 4.3 displays the
results from the Mann-Whitney significance test, with means, standard deviations,
and sparsity for each cue.
Category Feature U-stat Mean C (𝜎) Mean D (𝜎) p DOE Sparsity
Length Token quantity** 11060.0 165.047 (115.413) 99.123 (68.879) 0.000 C 0.000
Avg. token length 7356.5 3.862 (0.228) 3.904 (0.325) 0.373 - 0.000
Sent. quantity** 10805.0 9.140 (6.907) 5.434 (3.167) 0.000 C 0.000
Avg. sent. length 8692.0 19.266 (6.054) 18.210 (6.182) 0.152 - 0.000
Clarity LIX 8691.0 31.536 (7.048) 29.842 (7.985) 0.153 - 0.000
PoS Adjectives 8527.5 0.036 (0.019) 0.033 (0.023) 0.252 - 0.108
Adverbs* 6455.5 0.108 (0.040) 0.122 (0.043) 0.014 D 0.004
Nouns 7511.0 0.120 (0.035) 0.121 (0.041) 0.534 - 0.008
Verbs* 9545.5 0.210 (0.024) 0.202 (0.033) 0.004 C 0.000
Pronouns** 10858.0 0.162 (0.030) 0.144 (0.039) 0.000 C 0.000
Numerals 8073.0 0.001 (0.004) 0.002 (0.005) 0.579 - 0.841
Lexical
variation
TTR** 4047.0 0.586 (0.104) 0.687 (0.116) 0.000 D 0.000
OVIX** 5746.0 48.048 (7.181) 54.020 (22.544) 0.000 D 0.020
CWD** 5345.0 0.751 (0.085) 0.802 (0.088) 0.000 D 0.000
NER Time 8409.0 0.181 (0.530) 0.219 (1.050) 0.076 - 0.896
Location 8052.0 0.011 (0.072) 0.000 (0.000) 0.092 - 0.988
Person 8844.5 0.876 (1.114) 0.747 (1.289) 0.066 - 0.530
MSR 7804.5 0.000 (0.000) 0.013 (0.148) 0.308 - 0.996
Organisation 8169.5 0.026 (0.127) 0.005 (0.050) 0.067 - 0.972
Sentiment Negative (V)** 9690.5 0.077 (0.039) 0.069 (0.076) 0.002 C 0.112
Neutral (V)** 5632.0 0.871 (0.050) 0.896 (0.083) 0.000 D 0.000
Positive (V)** 9905.0 0.052 (0.042) 0.035 (0.038) 0.000 C 0.275
Negative (KB) 8739.0 0.242 (0.361) 0.161 (0.316) 0.053 - 0.729
Positive (KB) 7991.0 0.011 (0.088) 0.000 (0.000) 0.170 - 0.992
Neutral (KB)** 5135.0 0.478 (0.370) 0.649 (0.353) 0.000 D 0.287
Negative (B)** 11704.0 0.950 (0.210) 0.944 (0.215) 0.000 C 0.048
Positive (B) 7722.0 0.030 (0.167) 0.048 (0.213) 0.452 - 0.960
Self-
distancing
1st person** 9986.5 0.096 (0.025) 0.085 (0.028) 0.000 C 0.000
2nd person 7060.5 0.003 (0.005) 0.006 (0.011) 0.087 - 0.689
3rd person* 9121.0 0.007 (0.010) 0.006 (0.013) 0.014 C 0.606
Present tense* 6589.5 0.045 (0.033) 0.054 (0.035) 0.026 D 0.104
Past tense** 9789.5 0.117 (0.038) 0.100 (0.049) 0.001 C 0.020
Table 4.3.: Results from Mann-Whitney U-tests on the distributions of scores in confessions
vs. denials for each feature. The direction of effect (DOE) is indicated for significant
cues. Sparsity refers to the proportion of zero values among samples. Significance
indications: * p <0.05, ** p <0.0015625 (Bonferroni corrected). 𝜎 = standard devia-
tion.
Confessions were characterized by being longer regarding token and sentence
quantity (p<0.000 for both), and being more frequent in verbs (p=0.004) and pronouns
(p<0.000). They also had higher scores for negative sentiment (p=0.002 for Vader’s,
p=0.000 for base-BERT, and p=0.053 for KBLab’s), and positive sentiment according to
Vader’s (p<0.000). Confessions also had more frequent 1st person (p<0.000) and 3rd
person (p=0.014) pronouns. Past tense verbs were also more frequent in confessions
(p=0.001).
Denials, on the other hand, had more adverbs (p=0.014), higher values for lexical
variation (TTR, OVIX, and CWD, p<0.000 for all), neutral sentiment (p<0.000 for both
Vader’s and KBLab’s models), and present tense verbs (p=0.026).
31
Feature Coeff. DOE VIF
Adverbs -0.077 D 6.781
OVIX -0.090 D 7.948
Positive (V) 0.126 C 2.161
Neutral (KB) -0.122 D 3.476
1st person 0.107 C 9.960
3rd person 0.035 C 1.390
Past Tense 0.099 C 7.330
Confidence (C/D) 0.213 (0.214/0.212)
F1-score 0.715
Table 4.4.: Results from multiple logistic
regression (MLR) on the con-
fession vs. denial data split.
DOE = direction of effect. VIF
= variance inflation factor.
See 3.3 for more details.
Figure 4.3.: Confusion matrix for classifica-
tion of confessions and denials
based on the MLR model.
The NER counts of different kinds were not statistically significant given our thresh-
old, but had low p-values, except for measurements (MSR, p=0.308). References to time
were almost significant (p=0.076) with slightly higher numbers in denials. Locations
(p=0.092), persons (p=0.066), and organizations (p=0.067) were more prominent in
confessions. Note that the sparsity values are the same as for the true vs. false analysis,
as we are still looking at the whole data set.
For this analysis, correlation analysis with Pearson’s coefficient and estimation
of variance inflation factors (VIF) left seven significant features for multiple logistic
regression (MLR); adverbs, OVIX, positive sentiment (V), neutral sentiment (KB), first
and third person pronouns, and past tense verbs. Table 4.4 displays the results from
the MLR model.
According to the coefficients and VIF scores of the features included in the MLR
model for separating confessions and denials, the most discriminative features were
positive sentiment (V) (0.126), and neutral sentiment (KB) (-0.122). Not far after are
first-person pronouns (0.107), past tense verbs (0.099), and OVIX (-0.090). However,
the relatively high VIF scores for first-person pronouns (9.960), OVIX (7.948) and past
tense verbs (7.330) indicate uncertainty in the strength of these features.
The average confidence score for the model is low (21.3%), but slightly higher for
confessions (21.4%) than for denials (21.2%). Contrary to the true vs. false results,
the confidence is higher for the larger class (n=129 confessions and n=122 denials).
Looking at the confusion matrix, confessions also seem to have been easier for the
model to classify correctly, as the precision for confessions is higher than for denials.
The overall performance of the model is (71.5%).
Looking at the UMAP projections in Figure 4.4, displaying confessions and denials
based on all cues (A) vs. the seven cues used in the MLR model, we can see that the
reselection of cues changed the disposition of data points. Generally, it seems more
clustered than the projections of true and false statements, but there is a lot of overlap.
32
(a) Confessions vs. denials with all cues. (b) Confessions vs. denials with the remaining cues
after filtering out insignificant and collinear cues.
Figure 4.4.: UMAP dimensionality reduction projections of the with all 32 cues (a), and the 7
cues used in MLR model (b).
4.3. True vs. False x Confession vs. Denial
Given that the meaning of a statement usually entails whether it is a confession or
a denial, we will now explore truth and deception within confessions and denials
respectively. Note that the sample sizes are around half the size compared to looking
at the whole data.
In Table 4.5, the results from applying the same analysis to only confessions and
denials separately are displayed. As can be seen in the table, only three cues are
significant in both confessions and denials. Past tense verbs are truth-indicative in
both confessions and denials, and TTR and CWD are deception-indicative in both
confessions and denials. The third measure of lexical variation, OVIX, is only signif-
icant for true vs. false within confessions. Likewise, sentiment scores discriminate
between true and false confessions but have no significance when comparing true and
false denials. Negative sentiment indicates true confession, and positive and neutral
sentiment indicate false confession.
Considering PoS-tag frequencies, adjectives and pronouns separate true from false
within confessions, but nouns and verbs separate true from false within denials.
For denials, the token quantity was significantly higher in true statements, as well
as LIX, which indicates that true denials were less clear (readable) than false denials.
References to people were significantly more frequent in true denials, and present
tense verbs were more frequent in false denials.
After implementing correlation analysis and reselection of cues for distinguishing
true vs. false confessions, six cues remained. Table 4.6 displays results from multiple
logistic regression analysis on true vs. false confessions. The strongest coefficients
for distinguishing true confessions from false confessions were positive sentiment
(V) (-0.363), adjective frequency (-0.263), and negative sentiment (V) (0.216). Neutral
sentiment (KB) (-0.163), past tense verbs (0.142), and OVIX (-0.078) were relatively
weaker. Negative sentiment and past tense verbs indicated true confession, while
the rest were indicative of false confession. Regarding VIF scores, OVIX, adjectives,
and past tense verbs had higher values, indicating that their coefficients might be
misleadingly large. This model was slightly more confident when classifying false
confessions (50.5%), compared to true confessions (46.6%). False confessions were
33
Confessions Denials
Category Feature p DOE Sparsity p DOE Sparsity
Length Token quantity 0.172 - 0.000 0.027 T 0.000
Avg. token length 0.961 - 0.000 0.688 - 0.000
Sent. quantity 0.085 - 0.000 0.359 - 0.000
Avg. sent. length 0.158 - 0.000 0.051 - 0.000
Clarity LIX 0.326 - 0.000 0.014 T 0.000
PoS Adjectives 0.022 F 0.062 0.851 - 0.156
Adverbs 0.247 - 0.008 0.213 - 0.000
Nouns 0.599 - 0.000 0.034 T 0.016
Verbs 0.215 - 0.000 0.006 F 0.000
Pronouns 0.045 T 0.000 0.376 - 0.000
Numerals 0.721 - 0.822 0.765 - 0.861
Lexical
variation
TTR 0.014 F 0.000 0.018 F 0.000
OVIX 0.016 F 0.000 0.627 - 0.041
CWD 0.012 F 0.000 0.001 F 0.000
NER Time 0.885 - 0.860 0.733 - 0.934
Location 0.085 - 0.977 1.000 - 1.000
Person 0.176 - 0.457 0.007 T 0.607
MSR 1.000 - 1.000 0.374 - 0.992
Organisation 0.405 - 0.953 0.374 - 0.992
Sentiment Negative (V) 0.021 T 0.054 0.152 - 0.172
Neutral (V) 0.259 - 0.000 0.181 - 0.000
Positive (V) 0.000 F 0.163 0.460 - 0.393
Negative (KB) 0.379 - 0.674 0.860 - 0.787
Positive (KB) 0.156 - 0.984 1.000 - 1.000
Neutral (KB) 0.023 F 0.357 0.521 - 0.213
Negative (B) 0.002 T 0.047 0.322 - 0.049
Positive (B) 0.297 - 0.969 0.805 - 0.951
Self-
distancing
1st person 0.065 - 0.000 0.875 - 0.000
2nd person 0.561 - 0.721 0.387 - 0.656
3rd person 0.153 - 0.519 0.877 - 0.697
Present tense 0.182 - 0.085 0.008 F 0.123
Past tense 0.014 T 0.000 0.015 T 0.041
Table 4.5.: Results from Mann-Whitney U-tests on the distributions of scores in true vs. false
confessions vs. denials for each feature. The direction of effect (DOE) is indicated
for significant cues. Sparsity refers to the proportion of zero values.
generally further away from the hyperplane. Considering the confusion matrix in
Figure 4.5, however, the model correctly separated true confessions to a higher degree.
Overall, the information from these six cues led to a hyperplane which managed to
correctly separate true confessions from false ones with an F1-score of 66.2%.
Table 4.7 shows results from MLR on true vs. false denials, for which three cues
remained after the reselection process of significance and correlation control. All three
remaining cues were relatively equal in their importance, according to the coefficients.
Nouns (0.418) and person references (0.427) were slightly stronger than past tense
(0.345). All three indicated truth. With information from these cues, the MLR model
formed a hyperplane that classified the denials as true or false with an F1-score of
70.1%. The confidence was higher for true denials (69%) than for false denials (42%)
which is reflected in there being more information available as to what characterizes
a true denial. The overall confidence (57%) is slightly lower than the score. This is
discussed more thoroughly in the discussion section.
To visualize the discriminating powers of the reselected cues for true and false
34
Feature Coeff. DOE VIF
Adjectives -0.263 FC 4.232
OVIX -0.078 FC 6.681
Negative (V) 0.216 TC 2.315
Positive (V) -0.363 FC 2.526
Neutral (V) -0.163 FC 3.250
Past Tense 0.142 TC 4.426
Confidence (TC/FC) 0.484 (0.466/0.505)
F1-score 0.662
Table 4.6.: Results from multiple logistic re-
gression (MLR) on true vs. false
confessions. DOE = direction of
effect. VIF = variance inflation
factor. See 3.3 for more details.
Figure 4.5.: Confusion matrix for classifica-
tion of true and false confes-
sions based on the MLR model.
Feature Coeff. DOE VIF
Nouns 0.418 TD 4.702
NER Person 0.427 TD 1.415
Past Tense 0.345 TD 4.555
Confidence (TD/FD) 0.590 (0.712/0.427)
F1-score 0.701
Table 4.7.: Results from multiple logistic re-
gression (MLR) on true vs. false
denials. DOE = direction of ef-
fect. VIF = variance inflation fac-
tor. See 3.3 for more details.
Figure 4.6.: Confusion matrix for classifica-
tion of true and false denials
based on the MLR model.
35
confessions and denials, respectively, Figure 4.7a displays UMAP projections of the
data based on all cues (4.4a), of confessions based on the six reselected cues (4.7b), and
of denials based on the three reselected cues (4.7c). Again, there are no clear clusters.
Especially the confessions seem to be more spread in general, while the denials form
something more similar to clusters, although the data points are still overlapping
overall.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 4.7.: UMAP dimensionality reduction projections. True statements are blue and false
statements are pink. Confessions are filled dots and denials are x:es. (a) displays
the whole dataset with UMAP embeddings based on all cues. (b) displays the
confessions with embeddings based on the six MLR cues for confessions. (c)
displays the denials with embeddings based on the three MLR cues for denials.
4.4. True vs. False x Believed vs. Not Believed
By comparing differences between true vs. false to differences between statements that
are believed (to be true) vs. not believed (believed to be false), we can get a glimpse
of what textual features are over- or underestimated as cues for truth or deception
by a human annotator. Note that this comparison should be viewed as a case study
since the data split into believed vs. not believed are based on the annotations of one
person during the manual assessment of the data set (see 3.1 for a description of the
data collection). Additionally, the sample class sizes are unbalanced (96 believed and
155 non-believed).
The results from Mann-Whitney U-tests on the believed vs. not believed data split
are compared to the true vs. false data split in Table 4.8. Only the cues where one of
the two data splits had significant differences in their distributions are shown.
Regarding truth-indicative cues, past tense verbs was the only significant cue in the
true vs. false comparison. It was also more frequent in believed statements. Similarly,
non-believed statements (alas believed to be false) were also more frequent in present
tense verbs, just as false statements were. Lexical variation was false-indicative in two
out of three measures in the true vs. false comparison. However, in the comparison of
believed vs. not believed, all three measures of lexical variation (TTR, OVIX, CWD)
were higher in non-believed statements. At the same time, both token and sentence
quantity were significantly higher in believed statements.
Regarding sentiment estimations, the disagreement with what is true and what is
believed to be true was the largest. Negative sentiment (V and B) was significantly
more prominent in believed statements (p<0.000 for both) while having high p-values
(p=0.775 and p=0.404) for the true vs. false comparison. As negative and positive
sentiment perhaps should be conflicting, one could then imagine that the believed vs.
not believed tests would follow the true vs. false tests in that positive sentiment was
36
false-indicative (p=0.017), but this was not the case as positive sentiment had a very
high p-value (p=0.905) for believed vs. not believed.
Less surprising is that neutral sentiment was significant for non-believed state-
ments (p=0.018 (V), p<0.000 (KB)), as the p-values for these cues in the true vs. false
comparison were also close to significant (p=0.058 (V), p=0.092 (KB).
Overall, length and negative sentiment seemed to be over-estimated as truth-
indicative by the human annotator. On the other hand, considering false-indicative
cues, positive sentiment was under-estimated; OVIX and neutral sentiment were
over-estimated.
True or False Believed or Not
Category Feature p DOE Sparsity p DOE
Length Token quantity 0.071 - 0.000 0.000 B
Sent. quantity 0.188 - 0.000 0.000 B
Lexical
variation
TTR 0.018 F 0.000 0.000 N
OVIX 0.435 - 0.020 0.014 N
CWD 0.000 F 0.000 0.000 N
Sentiment Negative (V) 0.775 - 0.112 0.000 B
Neutral (V) 0.058 - 0.000 0.018 N
Positive (V) 0.017 F 0.275 0.905 -
Neutral (KB) 0.092 - 0.287 0.000 N
Negative (B) 0.404 - 0.048 0.000 B
Self-
distancing
Present tense 0.010 F 0.104 0.022 N
Past tense 0.004 T 0.020 0.012 B
Table 4.8.: Results from Mann-Whitney U-tests on the distributions of scores in true vs. false
believed vs. non-believed statements for each feature. The direction of effect (DOE)
is indicated for significant cues. Sparsity refers to the proportion of zero values
among samples.
37
5. Discussion
5.1. Summary of Key Findings
A higher frequency of past tense verbs was the only significant cue to indicate that
a statement was true in all comparisons. This result speaks against the hypothesis
in Hauch et al. (2015), where past tense verbs were predicted to be false-indicative.
However, our results might still speak in favour of the self-distancing hypothesis.
Considering that our participants were asked about an event in the past, if they were
to tell the truth they would probably use verbs in the past tense, either to confess
what they had done or to give an alibi of what they did. Using more present tense
verbs, which was indicative of deception according to our results, might be a sign of
distancing oneself from the event, as they avoid mentioning it.
The idea that true statements are longer than false ones receives some support. Token
quantity and sentence quantity were close to significant in the true vs. false comparison,
and measures of lexical variation were significantly higher in false confessions and
denials. Since length and lexical variation were quite strongly negatively correlated,
they both indicate this tendency, which aligns with the findings of Hauch et al. (2015)
and Sarzyńska-Wawer et al. (2023), but contradicts the findings of Levitan et al. (2018)
and R. M. Willén and Strömwall (2012b) on statement length.
Generally, however, the linguistic cues indicated more differences between confes-
sions and denials than between true and false. This could be seen in that there were
more significant cues for confessions vs. denials than for true vs. false. Furthermore,
we could see that there were differences in what cues were discriminative for truth vs.
deception within confessions and denials, respectively. Regarding PoS-tags, adjectives
were more common in false confessions, and pronouns were more common in true con-
fessions, which aligns with previous results from Solà-Sales et al. (2023). This tendency
could however not be seen for denials, where instead nouns were truth indicative and
verbs were false indicative. In the confession vs. denial analysis, we could see that
both positive and negative sentiment scores were higher in confessions, while denials
were more neutral. Confessions seem to contain more sentiment overall, both negative
and positive. This difference was also visible in that positive and negative sentiment
was discriminative for true and false confessions, but not for denials.
Overall, sentiment analysis was informative according to our results. Vader’s positive
sentiment score stood out as the strongest cue in the MLR models for both true vs.
false, confessions vs. denials, and true vs. false confessions, indicating deception, in
line with results from Sarzyńska-Wawer et al. (2023) and Papantoniou et al. (2022). For
confessions, Vader’s negative sentiment was also significant for truth, again aligning
with results from Sarzyńska-Wawer et al. (2023). One observation to make, however,
is that the three sentiment analysis models differed in their predictions. For the true
vs. false comparison, neutral sentiment was truth-indicative according to the Vader
model, but false-indicative according to the KB’s model. Although none of them had
p-values below 0.05, they were both close. Additionally, the sparsity for the neutral
estimations for both models was the lowest among the three valences, which speaks
for that none of them lacked a sufficient amount of scores to find a pattern. Another
example where the sentiment models differed is that the BERT-based model and KB’s
model found very few positive statements. Probably, the models behaved differently
38
because they were different in their structure, and they were trained on different data.
Especially Vader’s model is different from the other two since it is rule-based.
Speaking of the implementation of external models, analysis of NER objects in the
statements was indicative of truth on one occasion, for true denials. According to our
analysis, references to persons were more prevalent for true denials. This, however,
has a potential explanation in the design of the study. Comparing the four conditions
that were randomized through the questionnaire, there was one difference between
the guilty and the innocent scenarios. For the innocent scenarios, one extra person
was named, apart from the victim of the theft, namely the neighbour Mats. This means
that participants giving a false confession or a true denial had reason to refer to one
more person than did respondents for the guilty scenarios, which could be the reason
for the higher frequencies in true denials.
Apart from not yielding many significant differences in distributions, NER objects
had high sparsity in the data. This could mean that references to time, locations,
persons, measurements, and organisations were uncommon in the data. If this is true,
it could indicate a challenge in implementing NER for verbal lie detection. After all,
if the cue is almost non-existent in both classes, it is not very informative. However,
without knowing the sensitivity and performance of the model on our data, we cannot
draw any conclusions on that.
Considering our attempt at estimating the clarity of a statement, the readability
index LIX was indicative only for true denials. The connection between the clarity
criterion and readability could be questioned, and we do not claim that this measure
has any strong relevance for the clarity of a statement. However, this result tells us
something about how true denials differ from false ones. Considering how LIX is
calculated, it could be indicative that the number of tokens was higher, while the
number of sentences was not. This aligns with the indication that true denials had
higher token quantity.
The multiple logistic regression models gave us an indication of how informative the
most significant cues were to fit a regression hyperplane and measured the discriminat-
ing strength of the most significant and least correlated cues in relation to each other.
It should be stated that the results from these models have limited generalizability to
new data. Even if we used cross-validation, there is a risk of overfitting, which has not
been thoroughly examined in our analysis. The performance scores should therefore
not be interpreted as classification scores of how correctly they would predict truth or
deception in general, but only regarding this particular data set.
Having stated this, the present analysis suggests that the ability of our scheme to
successfully separate true statements from false ones seems to be roughly comparable
to that of previous studies, reaching a 60-70% F1 score. This suggests that our implemen-
tation of cues is about as strong and as weak as in other studies (e.g. Sarzyńska-Wawer
et al., 2023; Vrij, 2005; Wawer and Sarzyńska-Wawer, 2022; Wojciechowski et al., 2018).
We do not have evidence that any cues would have stronger discriminative potential
than this, which aligns with previous conclusions that criteria-based statement analy-
sis does not fill the requirements to be considered scientific evidence (Brennen and
Magnussen, 2023; Wojciechowski et al., 2018). This was also visualized in the UMAP
projections, of which none indicated clear distinguishable clusters corresponding to
the evaluated subcategories.
Our results establish that linguistic cues may have some discriminative potential for
separating truth from deception, but that the effect is small and inconclusive. Although
there were occurrences of cues that only appeared in one category (locations and
KB’s positive sentiment appeared only in confessions, measurements appeared only in
denials, see Table 4.5), these were differences based on one or two statements, which
does not suffice to draw any conclusions. No other cues were present in only one
39
category. This highlights the complexity of the task, and that there may be no linguistic
patterns that conclusively characterize truth or deception.
For our comparison of true vs. false with believed vs. not believed, the most in-
teresting part of this result was that the sentiment scores were so different between
true and believed. Positive sentiment, which was significant for truth, was not near
discriminative for believed vs. not believed (p=0.905). Also, negative sentiment was
more prevalent among statements that were believed to be true. We could also ob-
serve smaller differences in the importance of length, from the token and sentence
quantity, and lexical variation cues. Overall, these results are neither generalizable,
but indicate that there may be some bias towards negative sentiment and length in
which statements are believed to be true vs. false.
5.2. Limitations
As mentioned previously, in the section for the data collection (see 3.1.4), some limita-
tions with our study concern the data set. To recite some of them, there are aspects of
the level of motivation and the mode of production that prevent us from being able to
draw strong conclusions about the real-life use of credibility criteria for credibility
assessment.
Concerning our methodology for analysis, which intended to evaluate the diagnos-
ticity of the cues on our data using significance tests and correlation analysis before
applying logistic regression, we could have opted for other alternatives. Our strategy
for reducing collinearity by omitting cues that are non- or almost significant could
be considered letting go of potentially interesting information. An alternative would
have been to combine correlated cues instead of excluding the least significant ones.
Also, the analysis could be extended by controlling the impact of outliers.
There is also a layer of uncertainty regarding the diagnosticity of our cues depending
on the models we have used for part-of-speech tagging, sentiment analysis, and named
entity recognition. We do not know the exact performance of these models on our
data, which affects the strength of our results.
One limitation of our study, and perhaps the field in general, is that our coverage of
the criteria and their mapping to specific cues that are implemented is only approximate.
Some are clear, like the analogy between token quantity and statement length, but other
connections are looser. This affects the validity of our scheme to evaluate the reliability
of criteria-based statement analysis effectively. We cannot draw strong conclusions
about using specific criteria, since we might not have a conclusive representation
of their usage. For example, we cannot claim to have evaluated the clarity criterion
from the Swedish Supreme Court correctly. However, for other cues like length and
sentiment, our scheme was more successful.
40
6. Conclusion
6.1. Main Conclusions
6.1.1. Research Questions Revisited
The main purpose of this study was to build on existing research on computational
verbal lie detection with a new scheme for evaluating linguistic cues in Swedish.
Through this, we aimed to provide a first glance at how computational methods in
Swedish could be used to assess the diagnosticity and thus, the reliability, of cues used
in criteria-based statement analysis. We posed four research questions, which will be
answered in light of the findings in the following paragraphs.
Regarding the first research question on how informative the cues are as indica-
tors for truth or deception, our findings indicate that some of the cues indeed seem
informative, but not to any high degree. In particular, false statements seem to be
more positive, have less recycled vocabulary, and use more present tense verbs. True
statements, on the other hand, use more past tense verbs.
Our second research question was whether the type of statement, confession or
denial, mattered for what cues are discriminative. In response to this question, our
results strongly indicate that the type of statement matters. The cues explored show
larger differences between confessions and denials than between true and false state-
ments. According to our results, confessions contain more sentiment, and denials are
more neutral, making sentiment cues uninformative for denials but informative for
confessions.
The third research question concerned the characteristics of the human judgment
of true and false, and whether some cues are over- or under-estimated as indicators of
truth and deception. Based on our findings, it appears that human judgment exhibits
bias, suggesting that true statements are expected to be lengthy and negative, to a
higher degree than they are.
Lastly, our fourth research question treated the performance of our proposed scheme
and the implications that we can draw from this concerning the reliability of the cues as
indicators of truth and deception, and what this says about the Supreme Court’s criteria
and other approaches. Overall, our implementation of linguistic cues yielded results
that were comparable to previous research, both in which cues were discriminative
and not, and the degree of correctly separated statements. Our results seem to confirm
previous notions that the criteria hold limited information regarding the veracity of a
statement and that they should be considered carefully. However, some limitations to
our study hinder us from drawing strong implications about the reliability of cues and
the criteria in reality. For example, our data may differ substantially from real criminal
case statements, and the analogy between how the criteria are used in reality vs. how
they are scored in our study could differ.
6.1.2. Preliminary Implications for Theory and Practice
From what our findings entail, the most prominent implication for the field of compu-
tational verbal lie detection is that the type of statement, whether it is a confession or a
denial, should not be overlooked. Mainly, this follows from that we found more dissim-
ilarities between confessions and denials than between true and false statements. This
41
also confirms the pattern found in previous research, where cues often have different
directions of effect in different studies (Gancedo et al., 2021; Hauch et al., 2015).
Considering the relevance of criteria-based credibility assessment, and specifically
through the Swedish Supreme Court’s stated credibility criteria, our results do not
confirm yet deny that these criteria could hold relevance in reality. However, our
results do constitute an experimental example of how differences in true and false
statements could be estimated and evaluated. Following from the difference between
confessions and denials, our study suggests that what characterizes a true or false
statement might be different depending on what it is trying to achieve. Thus, the same
criteria or characteristics may not be equally as indicative of truth (or deception) in
every case. This could be an important implication for practice.
6.2. Contributions
This study has made a significant contribution to verbal lie detection research, es-
pecially in the Swedish context. We have presented a new data set with in total 251
statements in Swedish, which was constructed using a mock-crime scenario. The data
set is balanced concerning the type of statement (confession or denial) and valence
(true or false). In addition to providing a new data set, we have conducted a preliminary
evaluation of linguistic cues for verbal lie detection, adapted to Swedish, on this dataset.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to implement computational verbal
lie detection on a Swedish data set.
This project has meanwhile contributed to the source evaluation subproject of EB-
CRIME with a new curated data set and a first take at implementing natural language
processing for automatized content analysis of oral statements in Swedish. This lays
the foundation for further analysis on the topic.
The code for the analysis is available on GitHub1. Please contact the author for
information about data availability.
6.3. Future Work
While this study provides valuable insights, there are several areas where further
research could expand upon our findings and address certain limitations.
One clear challenge for verbal lie detection, in general, is the need for larger and
more diverse data sets. Our relatively simple experiment resulted in a well-balanced
data set that gave us new insights, especially into the differences between confessions
and denials. Future research could expand on the outline that was used in this study and
make similar experiments but change certain variables. For example, the experiment
could be adapted to instead collect witness testimonies, statements in other languages,
or involve another type of crime. Larger and more diverse data sets would enable more
careful analysis as well as more opportunities to use other NLP and machine learning
methods for verbal lie detection.
However, the need for the exploration of data from real criminal cases should not
be forgotten. Using computational methods makes this more efficient than ever, which
we have exemplified in this study. Incorporating data from real criminal cases, for
example, the transcriptions used in Wojciechowski et al. (2018) could potentially serve
as an already existing data set in Swedish, that also could enable comparative analysis
between the computational method and the law student’s assessments using intuition
or MASAM.
1https://github.com/claraagu/ma_thesis_VLD
42
This leads us to another important issue that future work should continue to examine:
human judgments. In our analysis, we identified a challenge in using computational
methods for examining the reliability of cues and criteria-based statement analysis,
that stemmed from the difficulty of representing the real notion of the criteria. Without
knowing what a legal practitioner regards as containing or not containing a criterion,
or how they actually use it, we cannot make clear recommendations for practice
about specific criteria. And ultimately, this is one important objective for verbal
lie detection. More could be done to enhance the analogy between a criterion and
certain computational text analysis measurements. Future work should aim to deeply
examine the connections between criteria and implemented cues. More experiments
on practitioners’ ideas and interpretations of criteria, and how they stand against the
computer’s idea of what is a “significantly higher prevalence” of a criterion, should
be compared. Future studies examining this are crucial for the future of verbal lie
detection research that seeks real-life implications. Perhaps, this is also an important
subject of study from the perspective of criminal procedure law, since clear descriptions
of the criteria seem to be missing, especially for the Swedish Supreme Court’s criteria.
Regarding both the question of available data sets, as well as the accuracy of criteria
prevalence estimation, there is also the challenge of accuracy when using external
pre-trained models. As mentioned in the limitations section (see 5.2), using models for
sentiment analysis and NER (for example) introduces uncertainty in the evaluation
of cues, since we do not know their performance on a given data set. Future work
could mitigate this by extending existing data sets and creating a gold standard for
sentiment analysis and NER. One way of doing this could be to manually correct the
output given by the models.
Another subject in connection to the use of pre-trained models is the need to develop
more ways of analysing deceptive language with NLP. Apart from extending the use
of sentiment analysis and NER for this purpose, this is a potential application for other
models. For example, more fine-grained emotion detection models, like guilt detection,
would be interesting to evaluate for verbal lie detection. Perhaps large language models
could be used in some way to estimate a statement’s level of clarity, consistency, or
logical structure. Large language models probably hold the potential for doing more
careful and sensitive analyses, and this is a large field that should also be considered
for verbal lie detection research.
In summary, future work should focus on evaluating the relationship between
practically applied criteria and the way they are quantified in computational verbal lie
detection, especially the Swedish Supreme Court’s criteria. Furthermore, collecting
more data sets, extending this data set to more accurately assess sentiment analysis
and NER, and reproducing this study on more and larger data sets would be crucial
for extending the knowledge of linguistic cues in a Swedish context. Lastly, various
ways of estimating criteria prevalence and conducting statement analysis should be
explored, especially concerning large language models.
43
Bibliography
Amado, Bárbara G., Ramón Arce Fernández, and Francisca Fariña Rivera (2015). “Un-
deutsch hypothesis and Criteria Based Content Analysis: A meta-analytic review”.
European Journal of Psychology Applied to Legal Context 7.1, pp. 3–12. doi: 10.1016/j.
ejpal.2014.11.002.
Arntzen, Friedrich (1970). Psychologie der Zeugenaussage: Einführung in die forensis-
che Aussagepsychologie [Psychology of eyewitness testimony. Introduction to forensic
psychology of statement analysis]. Göttingen, Germany: Hogrefe.
Bird, Steven, Edward Loper, and Ewan Klein (2009). Natural Language Processing with
Python. O’Reilly Media Inc.
Björnsson, Carl-Hugo (1968). Läsbarhet. Stockholm: Liber.
Bogaard, Glynis, Ewout H. Meijer, Aldert Vrij, and Harald Merckelbach (2016). “Strong,
but Wrong: Lay People’s and Police Officers’ Beliefs about Verbal and Nonverbal
Cues to Deception”. PLOS ONE 11.6. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156615.
Bond, Charles F. and Bella M. DePaulo (2006). “Accuracy of Deception Judgments”.
Personality and Social Psychology Review 10.3, pp. 214–234. doi: 10.1207/s15327957
pspr1003_2.
Brennen, Tim and Svein Magnussen (2022). “The Science of Lie Detection by Verbal
Cues: What Are the Prospects for Its Practical Applicability?” Frontiers in Psychology
13. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.835285.
Brennen, Tim and Svein Magnussen (2023). “Lie Detection: What Works?” Current
Directions in Psychological Science 32.5, pp. 395–401. doi: 10.1177/09637214231173095.
Brunato, Dominique, Andrea Cimino, Felice Dell’Orletta, Giulia Venturi, and Simon-
etta Montemagni (2020). “Profiling-UD: a Tool for Linguistic Profiling of Texts”.
English. In: Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence. Ed. by Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, Philippe Blache, Khalid Choukri,
Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis.
Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, pp. 7145–7151. isbn:
979-10-95546-34-4. url: https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.883.
DePaulo, Bella M., James J. Lindsay, Brian E. Malone, Laura Muhlenbruck, Kelly
Charlton, and Harris Cooper (2003). “Cues to deception”. Psychological Bulletin
129.1. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.129.1.74.
Gancedo, Yurena, Francisca Fariña, Dolores Seijo, Manuel Vilariño, and Ramon Arce
(2021). “Reality Monitoring: A Meta-analytical Review for Forensic Practice”. The
European Journal of Psychology Applied to Legal Context 13, pp. 99–110. doi: 10.5093/
ejpalc2021a10.
Granhag, Pär Anders, Leif A. Strömwall, Karl Ask, and Sara Landström (2021). Handbok
i rättspsykologi. Andra upplagan. Stockholm: Liber. isbn: 9789147113064.
Hägglöf, Hillevi (2023). The KBLab Blog: A robust, multi-label sentiment classifier for
Swedish. KBLab. url: https://kb-labb.github.io/posts/2023-06-16-a-robust-multi-
label-sentiment-classifier-for-swedish/ (visited on 2024-08-02).
Hauch, Valerie, Iris Blandón-Gitlin, Jaume Masip, and Siegfried L. Sporer (2015). “Are
Computers Effective Lie Detectors? A Meta-Analysis of Linguistic Cues to Decep-
tion”. Personality and Social Psychology Review 19.4, pp. 307–342. doi: 10.1177/
1088868314556539.
44
Hauch, Valerie, Siegfried L. Sporer, Stephen W. Michael, and Christian A. Meissner
(2016). “Does Training Improve the Detection of Deception? A Meta-Analysis”.
Communication Research 43.3, pp. 283–343. doi: 10.1177/0093650214534974.
Hwang, Hyisung C., David Matsumoto, and Vincent A. Sandoval (2016). “Linguistic
Cues of Deception Across Multiple Language Groups in a Mock Crime Context”.
Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling 13.1, pp. 56–69. doi: 10.
1002/jip.1442.
Johansson, Anders and Samir Sabri (2017). Fallet Samir. Stockholm: Ordfront. isbn:
9789170379321.
Johnson, Marcia K. and Carol L. Raye (1981). “Reality Monitoring”. Psychological Review
88.1, pp. 67–85. doi: 10.1037/0033-295x.88.1.67.
Kleinberg, Bennett, Maximilian Mozes, Arnoud Arntz, and Bruno Versuchere (2018).
“Using Named Entities for Computer-Automated Verbal Deception Detection”. Jour-
nal of Forensic Sciences 63.3, pp. 714–723. doi: 10.1111/1556-4029.13645.
Kwast, Christer van der (2015). Bortom rimligt tvivel: Thomas Quick och rättvisan.
Stockholm: Bladh by Bladh. isbn: 9789187371516.
Leach, Amy-May, Nawal Ammar, D Nicole England, Laura M Remigio, Bennett Klein-
berg, and Bruno J Verschuere (2016). “Less is more? Detecting lies in veiled wit-
nesses.” Law and human behavior 40.4, p. 401.
Leins, Drew A., Ronald P. Fisher, and Stephen J. Ross (2013). “Exploring Liars’ Strategies
for Creating Deceptive Reports”. Legal and Criminological Psychology 18.1, pp. 141–
151. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8333.2011.02041.x.
Levitan, Sarah Ita, Angel Maredia, and Julia Hirschberg (2018). “Linguistic cues to
deception and perceived deception in interview dialogues”. In: Proceedings of the
2018 conference of the north American chapter of the association for computational
linguistics: Human language technologies, volume 1 (long papers). Ed. by Marilyn
Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent. New Orleans, Louisiana: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 1941–1950. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18- 1176. url: https:
//aclanthology.org/N18-1176.
Loconte, Riccardo, Roberto Russo, Pasquale Capuozzo, Pietro Pietrini, and Giuseppe
Sartori (2023). “Verbal Lie Detection using Large Language Models”. Scientific Reports
13, 22849. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3126100/v1.
Masip, Jaume, Eugenio Garrido, and Carmen Herrero (2003). “Facial appearance and
judgments of credibility: the effects of facial babyishness and age on statement
credibility.” Genetic Social and General Psychology Monographs 129.3, pp. 269–311.
Masip, Jaume, Siegfried L. Sporer, Eugenio Garrido, and Carmen Herrero (2005).
“The detection of deception with the reality monitoring approach: a review of
the empirical evidence”. Psychology, Crime & Law 11.1, pp. 99–122. doi: 10.1080/
10683160410001726356. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/10683160410001726356. url:
https://doi.org/10.1080/10683160410001726356.
McInnes, Leland, John Healy, and James Melville (2018). “Umap: Uniform manifold ap-
proximation and projection for dimension reduction”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426.
Nahari, Galit (2023). “Meta-Research Perspectives on Verbal Lie Detection”. Brain
Sciences 13.3, pp. 392–392. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13030392.
Newman, Matthew L., James W. Pennebaker, Diane S. Berry, and Jane M. Richards
(2003). “Lying Words: Predicting Deception from Linguistic Styles”. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 29.5, pp. 665–675. doi: 10.1177/0146167203029005010.
Oberlader, Verena, Laura Quinten, Rainer Banse, Renate Volbert, Alexander F. Schmidt,
and Felix D. Schönbrodt (2020). “Validity of Content-Based Techniques for Credibility
Assessment -How Telling is an Extended Meta-Analysis Taking Research Bias into
Account?” Applied Cognitive Psychology 35.2, pp. 393–410. doi: 10.1002/acp.3776.
45
Papantoniou, Katerina, Panagiotis Papadakos, Theodore Patkos, George Flouris, Ion
Androutsopoulos, and Dimitris Plexousakis (2022). “Deception detection in text
and its relation to the cultural dimension of individualism/collectivism”. Natural
Language Engineering 28.5, pp. 545–606. doi: 10.1017/S1351324921000152.
Pedregosa, Fabian, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand
Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent
Dubourg, et al. (2011). “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python”. Journal of machine
learning research 12.Oct, pp. 2825–2830.
Pennebaker, James W, Martha E Francis, and Roger J Booth (2001). “Linguistic inquiry
and word count: LIWC 2001”. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 71.2001, p. 2001.
Sarzyńska-Wawer, Justyna, Aleksandra Pawlak, Julia Szymanowska, Krzysztof Hanusz,
and Aleksander Wawer (2023). “Truth or lie: Exploring the language of deception”.
PLOS ONE 18.2, e0281179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0281179.
Schelin, Lena (2006). “Bevisvärdering av utsagor i brottmål”. PhD thesis. Juridiska
institutionen, Stockholms Universitet.
Slätt, Andreas (2020). Berättelsen om Kevinfallet: familjens egna ord om den stora
rättsskandalen. Stockholm: Forum. isbn: 9789137153285.
Solà-Sales, Sara, Chiara Alzetta, Carmen Moret-Tatay, and Felice Dell’Orletta (2023).
“Analysing Deception in Witness Memory through Linguistic Styles in Spontaneous
Language”. Brain Sciences 13.2, pp. 317–317. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13020317.
Sporer, Siegfried L. and Jaume Masip (2023). “Millennia of legal content criteria of
lies and truths: wisdom or common-sense folly?” Frontiers in Psychology 14. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1219995.
Språkbanken Text (2024). SUCX 3.0. sv. doi: 10 . 23695 / 9C9F - 6132. url: https : / /
spraakbanken.gu.se/resurser/sucx3.
Steller, Max and Guenter Koehnken (1989). “Criteria-based statement analysis.” In:
Psychological methods in criminal investigation and evidence. Ed. by D. C. Raskin.
Springer Publishing Company, pp. 217–245.
Thompson, Andrew D. and Maria Hartwig (2022). “The language of high-stakes truths
and lies: Linguistic analysis of true and deceptive statements made during sexual
homicide interrogations”. Legal and Criminological Psychology. doi: 10.1111/lcrp.
12214.
Trankell, Arne (1982). Reconstructing the past: the role of psychologists in criminal trials.
Norstedts Juridik AB. isbn: 9789118276613.
Undeutsch, Udo (1967). “Beurteilung der Glaubhaftigkeit von Aussagen”. Handbuch
der Psychologie 11.S 126.
Vrij, Aldert (2005). “Criteria-Based Content Analysis: A Qualitative Review of the First
37 Studies.” Psychology, Public Policy and Law 11.1, pp. 3–41. doi: 10.1037/1076-
8971.11.1.3.
Vrij, Aldert, Ronald P. Fisher, Samantha Mann, and Sharon Leal (2010). “Lie detection:
Pitfalls and opportunities.” In: Police interrogations and false confessions: Current re-
search, practice, and policy recommendations. Ed. by G. D. Lassiter and C. A. Meissner.
American Psychological Association, pp. 97–110. doi: 10.1037/12085-006.
Vrij, Aldert, Pär Anders Granhag, Tzachi Ashkenazi, Giorgio Ganis, Sharon Leal, and
Ronald P. Fisher (2022). “Verbal Lie Detection: Its Past, Present and Future”. Brain
Sciences 12.12, 1644. issn: 2076-3425. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12121644.
Wawer, Aleksander and Justyna Sarzyńska-Wawer (2022). “Detecting Deceptive Utter-
ances Using Deep Pre-Trained Neural Networks”. Applied sciences 12.12, pp. 5878–
5878. doi: 10.3390/app12125878.
Willén, Rebecca (2016). “Counting on the Details: Inquiring Into Past Events of Coop-
erative Interviewees”. PhD thesis. University of Gothenburg.
46
Willén, Rebecca M. and Leif A. Strömwall (2012a). “Offenders’ lies and truths: an
evaluation of the Supreme Court of Sweden’s criteria for credibility assessment”.
Psychology Crime & Law 18.8, pp. 745–758. doi: 10.1080/1068316x.2010.548815.
Willén, Rebecca M. and Leif A. Strömwall (2012b). “Offenders’ uncoerced false confes-
sions: A new application of statement analysis?” Legal and Criminological Psychology
17.2, pp. 346–359. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8333.2011.02018.x.
Wojciechowski, Bartosz Wojciech, Minna Gräns, and Moa Lidén (2018). “A true denial
or a false confession? Assessing veracity of suspects’ statements using MASAM
and SVA”. PLOS ONE 13.6, e0198211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198211. url:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0198211.
47
A. Criteria Overview
Table A.1.: Overview of the categories included in our analysis, with their corresponding cues.
Pred. DOE = predicted direction of effect, according to previous study(ies). T =
observed as truth-indicative in previous research. F = observed as false-indicative in
previous research. T/F = ambiguous, observed to be both truth and false indicative.
- = no found indication. (X) = predicted as X, but no significance found according
to Hauch et al. (2015). Papers that cover each cue (or comparable) are listed. Note
however that references in this table are not exhaustive.
Criterion/Category Cue/Feature Pred. DOE Reference
Length Token quantity T/F Hauch et al. (2015),
Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Levitan et al. (2018)
Avg. token length - Hauch et al. (2015)
Sent. quantity Hauch et al. (2015)
Avg. sent. length T/F Hauch et al. (2015), Levitan et
al. (2018)
Clarity LIX - -
PoS Adjectives F Solá-Sales (2023), Sarzynska-
Wawer et al. (2023), Levitan
et al. (2018)
Adverbs - Solá-Sales (2023), Sarzynska-
Wawer et al. (2023)
Nouns - Solá-Sales (2023), Sarzynska-
Wawer et al. (2023)
Verbs - Solá-Sales (2023), Sarzynska-
Wawer et al. (2023)
Pronouns T Solá-Sales (2023), Sarzynska-
Wawer et al. (2023)
Numerals - Solá-Sales (2023), Sarzynska-
Wawer et al. (2023)
Lexical variation TTR T/F Hauch et al. (2015)
OVIX - -
CWD T/F Hauch et al. (2015)
NER Time T Kleinberg et al. (2018), Lo-
conte et al. (2023)
Location T Kleinberg et al. (2018), Lo-
conte et al. (2023)
Person T/F Kleinberg et al. (2018), Lo-
conte et al. (2023)
MSR T Kleinberg et al. (2018), Lo-
conte et al. (2023)
48
Table A.1 continued from previous page
Criterion/Category Cue/Feature Pred. DOE Reference
Organisation T Kleinberg et al. (2018), Lo-
conte et al. (2023)
Sentiment Negative (V) T/F Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Neutral (V) - Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Positive (V) F Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Negative (KB) T/F Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Positive (KB) F Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Neutral (KB) - Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Negative (B) T/F Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Positive (B) F Sarzynska-Wawer et al.
(2023), Papantoniou et al.
(2021), Newman et al. (2003)
Self-distancing 1st person T Hauch et al. (2015), Newman
et al. (2003)
2nd person (F) Hauch et al. (2015)
3rd person F/T Hauch et al. (2015), Newman
et al. (2003)
Present tense (T) Hauch et al. (2015)
Past tense (F) Hauch et al. (2015)
49
Table A.2.: A rough overview of the criteria from the Swedish Supreme Court, CBCA, RM, general approaches discussed connected to
criteria-based verbal lie detection. Colors indicate some matching characteristic about the criteria. This table was adapted
from the overview of CBCA and RM presented by R. Willén (2016).
Supreme Court CBCA RM General Approaches Category
50
Length Logical structure Visual details Cognitive load Length
Clarity Unstructured production Audio details Emotional approach Clarity
Richness of detail Quantity of details Smell Self-distancing PoS
Contextual embeddings Taste Lexical variation
Interactions Physical sensations NER
Conversations Affective details Sentiment
Unexpected complications Spatial details Self-distancing
Unusual details Temporal details
Superfluous details Cognitive operations
Details misunderstood Clarity
External associations Reconstruction
Subjective mental state Realism
Others’ mental states
Spontaneous corrections
Lack of memory
Doubts about own testimony
Self-deprecations
Pardoning the other
Crime-specific details
