REMEMBER WHEN
ICONIC MOMENTS
FROM HUMAN
HISTORY
2000 years ago it began
43 - 410 AD
100%
The number of Australian's
who are affected daily
ROME TAKES BRITAIN
Tribal Kingdoms: Before Roman conquest,
power was localized among Celtic tribes
(Britons). Roman Britain (43 – c. 410 AD): A
province of the Roman Empire, governed
by appointed officials, with centers in cities
like Londinium (London). Anglo-Saxon
Kingdoms (c. 410 – 1066): After Rome's
withdrawal, Germanic settlers formed
competing kingdoms (Wessex, Mercia,
Northumbria) eventually unified under
powerful kings (e.g., Alfred the Great).
Even today in 2026 there are 92 hereditary
leaders in England.
WE ARE STILL PLEBS
Even today in 2026 there are 92 hereditary
leaders in England. , While many of us are
burdened by debt and lack of rights inherited
2000 years ago. In 2026 we have a choice.
We are the people and we get to choose..
Every group that did this before, had the
existence of a perception of "them". It really
doesn't matter who "they" are. If a "them"
exists.
We destroy ourselves. Tell me one culture,
one people, any tribe, who hasn't defined
a "them". Stop looking for morals. Stop
thinking people are ever bad. They're
not. You're not. When you believe it. We
can get started and fix this thing to be
freakin' awesome. Together. As a weird
extended idiosyncratic family. There's no
villain in this story. We are all just people.
But now, we are people who have a
choice. People who know better. People
who can find out if we don't know. In the
11th century, the Lords thought they
were doing what was best. Were they ill
informed? I don't know. I wasn't there. I
don't care either. Arguing over who was
incorrect 2000 years ago sounds pretty
inefficient to me. Do what do we do? We
are human. We use our big fat brain to
come up with a solution. Let me be clear
on this: every culture or people or group or
tribe who's gone before us made 1.
mistake that becomes ridiculously
obvious as soon as we switch on our
brain.
THERE IS NO VILLAIN
There's no villain. I'm a criminologist. And I once dated an actor. I spoke at times about
my interpretation of criminology as an expert in my field of knowledge. Curiously, the
actor, was more than just a partner who couldn't pay the dinner bill. He could relate to
much of what I said about criminals from their training in acting school and experience
actung. Ultimately criminology taught me that crime is contextual and cannot exist
without external influence. My actor boyfriend learned and behaved with the absolute
that "bad guys do not know they are bad". We watched The Joker together to prove the
point from an acting perspective. To quote George R. R. Martin "Nobody is the villian of
their own story". To quote Dale Carneigie